AN IMPORTANT ROLE of the senior executive team at most
corporations is to manage the portfolio of businesses or activities.
In some companies, for example GE or Siemens, these portfolios
include a diverse group of businesses. Other, more-focused companies
manage a portfolio of various product lines, brands, customer groups,
geographies, or some other logical segmentation of the businesses.
Still, everyone manages a portfolio of business activities.
Many of us were first exposed to portfolio management via the
Boston Consulting Group (BCG) Growth/Share Matrix, shown in
figure 23, which was intended to illuminate both opportunities and
problems.
Dog
Relative Market Share
High Low
Market Growth
High
Star Question
Mark
Low Cash Cow
Figure 23—The Boston Consulting Group Growth/Share Matrix
Products with high market share in a fast-growing market were
labeled stars because they had a high market share in growing industries.
But they also required a lot of fresh investment to maintain their
growth status. Well-managed stars can be significant drivers of TSR.
These days the term “cash cow” has taken on many new meanings.
As used by BCG, it designated products with high market share
but whose overall market growth was relatively low. These products
were expected to have minimal opportunities for investing in growth,
so the cash they generate can be thrown off, or “milked,” in order to
fuel growth elsewhere.
Before we move on to the low-market share side of the matrix,
consider the differences between stars and cash cows. They both have
high market share and are expected to throw off a lot of operating
cash flow, but in the case of the stars, the value-maximizing strategy
tends to be reinvesting to fuel profitable growth. For the cash cows,
by contrast, the suggested strategy is to minimize reinvestment and
to milk the cash for other uses. This is a significant difference, so the
person or team managing the portfolio needs to have an extensive
understanding of the rate of past, current, and future market growth.
What if you were in the cell phone business and trying to forecast
market growth right before Steve Jobs introduced the first iPhone? Or
what if you produced vinyl records just before the compact disc was
released? To strictly apply the matrix, we need to firmly understand
what is happening in our own industry. Despite the best of intentions,
it’s often hard to know what’s coming. As a result, many cash
cows have been mistaken for stars—and far too much was invested
in expected growth that never materialized. Perhaps even worse,
many stars received too little growth investment and lost market
share because they were thought to be cash cows. How do we avoid
such strategic errors?
Four clear steps can reduce this risk. First, consciously develop
a mindset that avoids rigidly applying successful strategies from the
past; instead, your management should be flexible and nimble in
considering what may work in the future. Second, keep your organization’s
ears to the ground. Avoid an exclusively internal focus—stay
close to customers, follow your competitors’ innovation plans, and
monitor adjacent industries that could encroach on your business.
(Incidentally, these tasks are best carried out in the business unit, not
the corporate planning department.) Third, undertake each year a
thorough qualitative and quantitative portfolio review at the start of
the business planning process, and be sure to seek new information
to understand what has changed. Finally, be responsive to unexpected
innovations when they occur. Develop roadmaps for responding to
potential changes by considering expected innovations, preparing
response strategies, and quickly executing to mitigate the disruptive
effects of such changes. You will still be surprised at times, but less
frequently than in the past, and your team will be able to respond
more quickly when it counts.
Let’s go back to the BCG Matrix. It’s rarely still used in its
original form, but it will be discussed here because it provides a
useful backdrop for making some important points before recommending
a new approach. The two boxes on the right, “question
marks” and “dogs,” are for products that have relatively low market
share. The easier ones to deal with are the dogs—products with
a low market share in a slow-growth market. Alas, most managements
get it wrong. As I wrote in 2011 in a CFO.com article titled
“Are You Wasting Time on Poor Performers?”1 it is common for
executives to devote more attention and financial capital to fixing
poor-performing products and businesses, while at the same time
mistakenly assuming that stronger products and business units
will “take care of themselves.” This mistake can be in response
to investors’ challenging executives with tough questions about
the company’s unsuccessful products and business units. In other
cases, it may be personal pride that motivates executives to improve
disappointing projects during their tenure.
But is shareholder value really maximized when the corporate
office devotes a higher proportion of time or capital to turning around
poor-performing products and business units? Or would the shareholders
be better served by exiting their losers and focusing executive effort
on investing in and growing the revenue and value of the winners?
To help answer this question, we examined long-term shareholder
return trends in capital markets, to develop a pragmatic perspective
on where corporate resources should be devoted. At the time of the
study, the then-current members of the S&P 500, excluding those not
public for the full period, were evaluated over the 10-year period from
2001 through 2010 on the basis of their cumulative TSR.
The high performers whose returns are shown at the far right of
(both parts of ) figure 24 delivered outstanding value creation. And
when we grouped all companies into performance quartiles (based
on TSR), the top-quartile performers, as shown in the graph at the
right, delivered dramatically higher average TSR (+709%) than those
at the bottom (–35%). A favorite consulting maxim says that roughly
80% of value creation comes from 20% of activities. We will broach
this in more detail later, but for now it’s worth noting that the data in
the figure neatly follows this dictum: Of the total value of all quartiles
(877%), the top quartile (or 25%—close enough for our purposes)
represents 81%. This is only one data point, of course, but it supports
the idea that value creation tends to be highly concentrated.
-1000%
0%
1000%
2000%
3000%
4000%
5000%
6000%
0% 25% 50% 75% 100%
10-Year Compound TSR
Percentile (S&P 500)
-35%
44%
159%
709%
-100%
0%
100%
200%
300%
400%
500%
600%
700%
800%
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Average 10-Year Compound TSR of Each Quartile
Quartile
Figure 24—Average TSR by S&P 500 Quartile 2001–2010
But how do these companies achieve such outstanding results?
Doing so requires sound strategy and outstanding execution; in most
cases, these top-quartile companies successfully reinvest a substantial
percentage of their cash flow in capital expenditures, R&D, acquisitions,
and other investments that lead to strong, top-line revenue
growth. They typically deliver a strong cash return on capital, as well.
To apply these findings in a given organization, consider a hypothetical
company with four business units, each valued at $100 million
at the start of 2001. We then assume that each of the business units
grows in value at the average TSR of one of the four quartiles in our
study. In other words, the value of the top business unit A grows by
709%, B grows by 159%, C grows by 44%, and D declines in value by
35%. Figure 25 demonstrates the change in value of our hypothetical
company. The star business unit A grows over 10 years to be worth
over eight times its starting value, representing 63% of the value of
the company in 2010. This value creation in A is 20 times higher than
the value destroyed by the bottom business D.
Initial Value 10-Year TSR Ending Value Percent of
Total
A $100 709% $809 63%
B $100 159% $259 20%
C $100 44% $144 11%
D $100 -35% $65 5%
Consolidated $400 219% $1,277 100%
D D
C C
B
A B
A
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Initial Value Ending Value
Value of Businesses
Figure 25—Change in Value of Hypothetical Four-Business Company
What does this mean for the priorities of executives? If a lack of
corporate attention and investment causes the top business to deliver
only 90% of its potential, then $71 million of the $709 million in
expected growth vanishes. For sure, A would still be a great business,
but this $71 million shortfall wipes out twice as much value as the
entire $35 million in value destroyed by D.
In many client situations, my colleagues and I have observed that
executives overseeing multi-business companies often limit the potential
of their star businesses by underinvesting in their future. Capital
allocation can become a bureaucratic process in which negotiations,
a misplaced concern for fairness, and fear of change lead to an indiscriminate
smearing of capital, R&D, and marketing resources across
the company’s business units with far too little attention to the differences
in value creation opportunities. Maximizing shareholder value
involves focus, which is to say it often requires investing substantially
more in strong products and businesses than in the weak ones. This
will be discussed extensively in chapter 9.
Sometimes the only effective way to divert attention from a dog
business is a sale or spinoff. There is often a hesitancy to sell, since
these poor businesses don’t fetch much in the market, so executives
often prefer to try to “fix” performance first and then consider a
divestiture. Unfortunately, the reluctance to sell these businesses often
exacerbates the problem by delaying the true potential value of the
stars. In the example above, it may be beneficial to sell business D at
the outset, even at a substantial discount, if needed. This may help
focus management’s attention and investment on business A and so
avoid giving up millions more in potential value. Some managers,
though, worry that the write-off from taking such a loss on a sale
will tank EPS and cause their stock to crash. In most cases, luckily,
investors have already baked the book loss into the price, and the stock
actually increases due to the signal that the company is taking action.
This is yet another reason why an RCE outlook is more accurate and
comprehensive than focusing on EPS alone.
The products in the final quadrant of the BCG Growth/Share
Matrix are characterized as question marks, or what are sometimes
referred to as problem children. These products are in high-growth
markets but have been unable to amass a meaningful market share.
You can’t develop a true default strategy for these products without
first understanding why they are where they are—which is why the
“question mark” nomenclature is perhaps more fitting than “problem
children.”
For example, a product could be relatively new and innovative,
with a low market share that is expected to be temporary. Products
facing this situation are hardly “problem children”; they are in fact
future stars, and in the best of cases they present the most likely opportunities
for success. Often, the ideal value-creating strategy for such
products is to reinvest in their development and growth at a very high
rate—often with a reinvestment rate of well over 100%. That is, more
than 100% of the cash flow they generate is plowed back into growth.
The extra cash needs can be met through debt financing, issuing
equity, or using cash generated from other products. For stand-alone
companies, where such products are the company’s only business, it
can be difficult to maximize value. This is why such businesses often
make great acquisition targets for large competitors that are replete
with cash cows and yet lacking effective areas for reinvestment.
At the other end of the spectrum, some products that show up
as question marks have been around for quite some time but, even
with the best of efforts and intentions, have been unable to gain the
customer traction needed to attain significant market share. Perhaps
they have a weak or unappealing brand, or they are perceived as lowquality
or lacking reliability. Or maybe there is nothing wrong with
the product, though tactical execution has been ineffective.
In principle, having low market share in a fast-growing market
should provide the opportunity to beat market growth. The key to
determining the right strategy is to figure out what has caused the
underperformance. Given the potential size of the upside, it is worth
considering alternatives to revitalize the product, increase growth,
and move it into the star quadrant. Possible improvements to the
product, the positioning, and brand identity, as well as to distribution
and other aspects, should be considered. In some cases, incremental
improvements aren’t worth much, so the best path is to leapfrog the
product with a new and better offering that cannibalizes the existing
product but has a better chance of delivering above-market growth
and market-share gains.
The BCG Matrix has revolutionized strategic thinking, though
many experts have identified problems with it. Some of the criticisms
relate to how it is often implemented in more of a backward-looking
rather than forward-looking manner. It is imperative that the marketshare
and market-growth indicators are based on forward expectations,
not the past. Of course, evaluating the past can be important
in ensuring that the forecast of the future is grounded in reality. Big
changes from past to future should be expected only when their causes
are fully understood and considered probable.
The BCG Matrix was developed as a process to reallocate cash
internally between businesses. But it poses unnecessary constraints
on growth because it ignores the ability to finance externally through
debt or new-equity issuances. It also has the potential to encourage
overinvestment, since it similarly ignores the possibility of distributions
to shareholders.
But potentially the biggest problem with the original matrix is
that it doesn’t factor in actual profitability. The originators made
assumptions about what the likely profitability would be in each
quadrant and used that to inform the strategy. But, of course, we will
find products in commodity businesses that are in the star quadrant,
yet whose average rates of return through a business cycle are hardly
attractive. Investing in these products could well be value-destroying.
And there are dogs that produce decent cash flow and perhaps should
be treated more like cash cows, especially if such businesses command
such a low-valuation multiple that the proceeds from a disposal would
be worth significantly less than the option of continuing to harvest
the remaining cash flow.
Before I propose a new, improved, two-by-two strategic matrix,
which will be discussed below, consider first how an investor studies
a portfolio of stocks. And the same principles, by the way, are at
work for any investor holding a portfolio of fixed-income securities,
real-estate assets, commodities, or even cryptocurrencies. I use the
stock example because it’s more akin to managing a portfolio of
operating businesses.
At its core, the goal of stock investors is to hold shares in companies
that will rise in value, with consideration for both stock-price
appreciation and dividends. Of course, they won’t get them all right,
but if they pick more stocks that outperform than underperform the
rate of return of the overall market, their portfolio will likely perform
well. The same is true inside a company. If we’re in management,
we want to have our capital invested in products and businesses that
we expect to rise in value. As discussed in chapter 6, it’s not about
investing in good companies. It’s about investing in companies that
improve more than the market already expects them to. Think of
the cumulative RCE trend of each product or business as its stock
price performance. We want to hold products and businesses that are
expected to be able to meaningfully increase RCE; and if we achieve
that, the overall company’s stock price is highly likely to rise.
Countless factors drive a company’s RCE, and hence its share
price. But if we use the simplest portrayal, RCE increases either when
revenue grows or when the RCE margin improves, or both. It is critical
to understand that the higher the RCE margin, the more valuable the
growth is. Let’s say companies X and Y both add $1 million in revenue,
but that company X has an RCE margin of 10%, as compared to just 2%
for company Y. In that case, whereas company X would add $100,000
in RCE, the RCE increase for company Y will only be $20,000. Of
course, it’s better for company Y to grow its RCE by $20,000 than to
have no growth at all; yet the important point here is that the identical
revenue growth of company X generates five times as much RCE
improvement as the revenue growth of company Y—and that’s likely
to translate into five times the value creation per dollar of growth.
If these two businesses were part of the same corporate business
portfolio, we would want to be sure we funded all the growth available
in company X, even if we have to curtail the growth investment
budget in company Y to do so. Unfortunately, as discussed above, far
too many companies “peanut butter” spread2 resources across their
portfolio and thus end up underfunding their best opportunities. This
is one of the most important reasons why spinoffs of smaller, fastergrowing
businesses tend to create tremendous value. As part of a
large corporate infrastructure, promising businesses often find it hard
to attract the resources needed to fuel all their available growth. The
leaders of all the other more-established businesses in the corporation
sometimes complain, “Why do they get to invest 10% of sales in
growth, but we only get 4%?” You see the problem….
The negotiations and backroom deals that occur during capital
budgeting often hinge on fairness and balance, which aren’t words
the average stock-market investor can even spell. Imagine Warren
Buffett investing equally in 10 companies because he didn’t want
the leaders of the lower-performing companies to feel he was being
unfair. What’s worse is when internal cronyism diverts resources to
favor the subpar businesses. Say business unit X has more valuable
growth opportunities, but the head of business unit Y was the college
roommate of the chief operating officer; so though business unit Y
may create scarcely one-fifth of the value, it very well may end up
getting as many or more investment dollars.
Of course, nobody will ever say they are allocating more resource
to a business because the leader is a close friend. They always have
some strategic sounding mumbo jumbo like, “Susan, I know you and
your team are really delivering and you have some exciting plans and
investment opportunities, but this year we will need you to be team
players while we plow untold millions into shoring up the faltering
strategic position of Harry’s business unit.” The affronting manager
continues, “They have taken a hit lately and their business built this
company 50 years ago. How would it look if we didn’t do everything
we can to fix it? In the end we may be throwing good money at bad
investments, but we’ve got to try. Maybe we can fund your growth
plan next year….” These situations, as regrettable as they are, happen
all the time.
The Tradeoff between Growth and Return
Because value is created by the combination of growth and return, we
should dispassionately allocate more resources to the best growth and
return opportunities. To build a better two-by-two matrix, we need
one dimension to capture growth and the other to capture return.
Simply using market growth is inadequate—we need to augment
this with some sense of whether we can gain market share. A basic
methodology is to combine market growth with market share, where
lower market share relates to a greater opportunity to capture more.
The higher the market share, the more limited are the opportunities
to increase it; in fact, it may be hard just to maintain market share if
it’s already high.
A table can be created in which a company’s (or product’s) growth
score is derived based on its market growth, plus an increment determined
by its current market share as a percentage of the market
leader’s. An examination of historical growth versus the ratio of
market share to the leaders’ share for our product and peer products
can be used to estimate a useful table for a product market or industry.
For example, consider figure 26, which is based on apparel retailers3
currently in the Russell 1000 that were public for the full period
of 2000 through mid-2018. The graph relates the one-year percentage
change in market share to the initial market share at the start of the
period as a percentage of the leader’s share at that time. As this is just
an illustration, this graph shows whole companies, but some of these
companies have multiple brands, and better insights would come from
an analysis of market share and revenue growth by brand. But even
in this case, it is easy to see how low-market-share companies tend
to gain share while higher-market-share businesses tend to lose it.
y = -0.057ln(x) - 0.0347
R² = 0.4055
-20%
-10%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
Subsequent 1-Year % Change in Market Share
Initial Market Share as a % of Market Leader
% Change in Market Share vs. Initial Share
vs. Leader (Apparel Retail 2000-2018)
Figure 26—Percentage Change in Market Share vs. Initial Share as a
Percentage of the Leader Share
The next important growth characteristic is market growth. In
many product categories there are experts who forecast growth, in
some cases with decent accuracy; but the longer the forecast, the less
reliable it is. It’s important to use such forecasts but also to examine
past experience before management makes a judgment about what
they expect in terms of forward growth in a market. It is essential to
recognize that, though there are many credible inputs from forecasting
experts, in the end management must make its own judgment. There
is no escaping this responsibility, especially given that 10 “experts”
will give 10 different answers.
How about 22 experts? As of September 2018, Apple was the most
valuable company in the world, so, given the amount of money at
stake, it is scrutinized by many highly skilled sell-side analysts. For
the quarter ending September 2019 (a year from the time I wrote
this), there are 22 analysts following Apple who have made revenue
forecasts. They range from $59.7 billion to $65.4 billion, with fairly
good dispersion across this range. The consensus estimate for the
current quarter is $61.1 billion, so the projected growth rates from this
level range from –2.3% to +7.0%. If you were collecting such data for
Apple and some peers in order to estimate market growth, it would
be a challenging decision to settle on an expected market-growth rate.
Fortunately, when we “average” the experts’ forecasts, we tend to
get much better predictions. Not perfect, but much better. This is really
just what’s known as “the wisdom of crowds,” whereby the average
answer of a group tends to be better than that of any individual in
the group—since each of their unique perspectives, along with the
errors they entail, is mitigated by the averaging process.
The wisdom of crowds is compelling. In the book Out of Control,4
Kevin Kelly describes how in 1991 Loren Carpenter led a group of
about 5,000 computer graphics conference attendees who were given
a wand with a red and a green side. Carpenter and his team used
cameras to pick up the average signals from the crowd. The two sides
of the room were able to control paddles and play the then-popular
game of Pong. To take up something harder, they began flying an
airplane. I suspect few, if any, of the computer graphics crowd knew
how to fly, so undoubtedly many got it wrong. But on average, they
directed the aircraft controls correctly and fly they did. (I highly recommend
the book.)
Back to our apparel industry example. In figure 27, we see for
the aggregate apparel industry both the one-year consensus revenue
growth forecast and the actual growth that occurred. The forecasts
are derived by adding up the average revenue forecasts of the analysts
following each company, as of each historical quarter going back
over 60 quarters.
The graph has a lot going on. In stable times the analysts do a
quite good job of estimating growth. And the median of analysts’
forecasts over time of 5.1% is very close to the actual median of
5.0%. But when big swings happen, the analysts are a step behind. In
mid-2006 they forecasted 5.9% market growth—actual was 6.7%—
but a year later they were still forecasting 4.7%, and actual dropped
to 0.2%. By the end of the third quarter in 2008, they still predicted
4.1%, almost as if they didn’t want to recognize reality; Q3 growth
dipped to –3.6%. Finally, by the first quarter of 2009, they forecasted
a decline of –3.5%, but nope; the market had now turned, and the
actual apparel industry growth turned out to be a positive 1.7%. Two
quarters later, the predicted growth turned positive at +2.6%, yet the
actual growth that quarter was a whopping 7.2%.
-6.0%
-4.0%
-2.0%
0.0%
2.0%
4.0%
6.0%
8.0%
10.0%
12.0%
Dec-01
Dec-02
Dec-03
Dec-04
Dec-05
Dec-06
Dec-07
Dec-08
Dec-09
Dec-10
Dec-11
Dec-12
Dec-13
Dec-14
Dec-15
Dec-16
Apparel One-Year Forward Market Growth Rate
Consensus Market Growth Actual Market Growth
Decline happened
quicker and lasted longer
than expected
Bounce back happened
quicker and rose higher
than expected
Figure 27—Historical Apparel Market Growth
This is not to blame the analysts—it’s normal human behavior!
As discussed earlier, behavioral economists refer to this as recency
bias. It can be hard to avoid such innate biases, which is why it is
recommended that rules-based decision processes be implemented
wherever possible.
To bring together market growth and market share into a grid for
use in assessing market opportunity, like that in figure 28, we simply
combine the historical market growth at various percentiles with the
typical growth achieved as a function of market share (that is, as a
percentage of the market share of the market leader). The white box
at the upper left, for example, is simply the sum of the 9.7% above
and the 10.3% to the left. Typically, apparel companies with such a
small share in such a fast-growing market achieve as much as 20%
revenue growth.
9.7% 5.7% 3.4% 1.8% 0.5% -0.6% -1.4% -2.2% -2.9% -3.5% Market Share
Growth
Min 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% Max % of Leader
Share
10.3% Max 20% 16% 14% 12% 11% 10% 9% 8% 7% 7%
8.5% 90% 18% 14% 12% 10% 9% 8% 7% 6% 6% 5%
6.8% 80% 16% 13% 10% 9% 7% 6% 5% 5% 4% 3%
6.4% 70% 16% 12% 10% 8% 7% 6% 5% 4% 4% 3%
5.8% 60% 15% 12% 9% 8% 6% 5% 4% 4% 3% 2%
5.0% 50% 15% 11% 8% 7% 6% 4% 4% 3% 2% 2%
4.7% 40% 14% 10% 8% 6% 5% 4% 3% 2% 2% 1%
4.2% 30% 14% 10% 8% 6% 5% 4% 3% 2% 1% 1%
3.2% 20% 13% 9% 7% 5% 4% 3% 2% 1% 0% 0%
0.5% 10% 10% 6% 4% 2% 1% 0% -1% -2% -2% -3%
-3.6% Min 6% 2% 0% -2% -3% -4% -5% -6% -6% -7%
Market
Growth
Historical
Percentile
Market Growth
Market Share as a Percentage of Market Leader’s Share
Figure 28—Growth Score Based on Market Growth and Market Share
The shading in the figure indicates those combinations of market
growth and market share that would be expected to have a belowaverage
revenue-growth opportunity. It is important to note that
actual growth may well be different from the growth opportunity,
but for characterizing the market, the growth-opportunity score is
what is needed.
This growth score needs to be compared to a score that reflects
pricing, efficiency, and productivity. The ideal measure for that purpose
is Residual Cash Margin (RCM), which is simply RCE as a percentage
of revenue. Several advantages accrue from the use of RCM, versus
return on capital or similar return measures. The product of RCM and
revenue is RCE in dollars, so RCM directly tells us, as discussed above,
how much value is created by each increment of revenue growth. It
is straightforward to determine if giving up some RCM to achieve
higher growth will lead to more RCE dollars, or, alternatively, if giving
up some growth to achieve higher RCM adds value. And of course,
since RCE is determined on a cash basis relative to a required return
on assets shown at their original cost, there is no bias either against
investment or in favor of milking old assets well beyond their useful
life, as discussed in chapter 3.
One important benefit of using RCM is that it is agnostic about
the value-maximizing level of asset intensity. That means RCM works
just as well for asset-intensive businesses as for asset-light ones. An
asset-light business, like a pure service company, will have very few
assets, so any measure of return is likely to be astronomically high—
and it may seem that more assets should be invested. But alas, in
such a business there is really no capital investment opportunity, so
the signals are misguided. With RCM, it doesn’t matter if a business
is asset-intensive or asset-light; in both cases, asset intensity is simply
treated as a cost in determining RCE and RCM.
With the revenue growth score and the RCM in hand, we can
now introduce the Fortuna Advisors Growth/RCM Matrix. Products
and businesses can be placed into the two-by-two matrix, based on
whether they are above or below average on the growth score and
RCM, as shown in figure 29.
Low High
Residual Cash Margin (RCM)
Growth Score
Earn Right to
Grow
Monetize
Step on the
Gas
Explore
Expansion
Plans
Low High
Figure 29—The Fortuna Advisors Growth/RCM Matrix
As we have found in our client work, the most value, by far, is
created by the products and companies in the upper-right quadrant
(“Step on the Gas”), where both the growth opportunity and the
profitability are above average. As shown next in figure 30, high136
revenue growth and RCM products typically deliver the best TSR,
so we really need to step on the gas. We examined the TSR of the
largest nonfinancial companies listed in the United States at the end
of 2017 and sorted them based on whether their three-year revenue
growth and RCM were each above or below median.
The median TSR of the companies in the step-on-the-gas quadrant
was 66%, which was over 3½ times the median TSR of the companies
in the monetize quadrant at 18%. The longer the time horizon, the
more this gap widens.
33%
Three-Year Average RCM
Low High
Three-Year Growth CAGR
High
41% 66%
Low
18%
Figure 30—Median Three-Year TSR vs. Growth and RCM (2015–17)
Those companies above median on growth but below on RCM had
median TSR of 41%, which is somewhat better than the 33% median
TSR achieved by the companies that were above median on RCM but
below median on growth. Not to overemphasize this, but it shows that
growth has been somewhat more important than profitability among
this broad population of companies over this period. This finding can
and does vary by industry, and for many industries the findings can be
different at various points in the economic and market cycle.
Several important strategic insights should be considered in each
quadrant of the Fortuna Advisors Growth/RCM Matrix, further
discussed below.
Step-on-the-Gas Products and Services
Step-on-the-gas products in the upper-right quadrant should receive
the highest priority for resource allocations and command the most
attention from management. The opportunity to create value is the
greatest, but the chance to fall short of the potential is greatest, too.
Avoid the temptation to get caught up in spending all your time
fixing “problem products.” Unless the problems are threatening the
survival of the company, far more of the potential difference in the
success of a leader will be determined by how they manage their
step-on-the-gas products.
A step-on-the-gas product typically consists of a well-differentiated
product in a fast-growing market that is highly meaningful to consumers.
For example, consider the iPhone, which introduced impressive
new technological features that revolutionized and significantly
expanded the smartphone market. At the Macworld convention on
January 9, 2007, Steve Jobs introduced the world to the iPhone, and it
became available a few months later. Between 2007 and 2018, Apple
introduced no fewer than 11 models, each with new features…and
a higher price tag. Total iPhone units sold soared from 1.4 million in
2007 to more than 216 million in 2017. Talk about stepping on the gas!
To determine how best to step on the gas requires an understanding
of the potential sources of differentiation. For example, does the
product (or service) have superior features and capabilities that are
useful and important to the customer? Or do customers simply like
being associated with the product as a symbol of status and prestige?
If so, the product may be said to be differentiated, which allows the
possibility for premium pricing—customers will pay more for it.
There are also other sources of differentiation, for example process
efficiencies. Say a product is more readily available or has faster delivery
thanks to a logistics advantage (cough—Amazon). This would be
an example of a process improvement creating a functional benefit
that drives differentiation. But not all process efficiencies result in
differentiation.
Say, instead, that a product is made through a more-streamlined
process that allows it to be available at a price discount while still
maintaining comparable profitability with competitors. In this case,
we’re dealing with a cost advantage—not exactly a product differentiator,
though this still allows for the ability to profitably grow market
share. In any case, many types of differentiation and other comparative
advantages abound, but it is critical that these all be evaluated in
an objective and disciplined manner.
Everyone thinks they have a differentiated brand, but these days
we have credible ways to assess how differentiated a brand really is in
the collective eyes of the consumer audience. One useful source of
brand assessment insights, which will be discussed in detail in chapter
11, is BERA Brand Management, a firm that Fortuna Advisors began
working with in 2017. BERA developed one of the largest brand-equity
assessment platforms in the world, capturing one million consumers’
perceptions across over some 4,000 brands. Such perceptions are then
used to explain and quantify not only how brands grow, but, perhaps
more important, how brand growth translates into financial performance,
including valuation. Tools like BERA provide managements
with a strict, fact-based ability to interpret and apply insights on the
sources of brand differentiation.
Differentiation is always defined by the customers’ being willing
to pay a price premium due to their perception that the value
to them of the product or service is higher than that of competing
offers—in short, differentiation is defined by relative consumer value.
We can assess it in two ways: first, by surveying consumers and asking
questions that can quantify differentiation; and second, by analyzing
changes in both market share and relative pricing data to determine
whether our product is priced at a premium, at parity, or at a discount.
If a product is not priced at a premium or is growing market share,
it is not differentiated.
Once the sources of differentiation are understood, management
needs to explore how robust these differentiators are, whether (and
the extent to which) competition is encroaching and so could neutralize
the differentiators, and whether any other external or internal
trends are on the horizon that could reduce the company’s potential
for profitable growth. The first priority for investment must be to
reinforce and extend the sources of differentiation, and to be prepared
to leapfrog existing products with new and improved offerings despite
the potential for cannibalizing current sales.
We were all impressed with the first iPhone, and would continue
to be awestruck by how it changed the world of mobile telephony,
even if nothing followed it. But from a commercial perspective, each
successive new iPhone created the opportunity to reach a higher and
higher plateau, even though that plateau wasn’t visible when it all
began. The pipeline of new iPhones and upgraded versions keeps
producing, and though some versions have underperformed, the
volumes attained would have been considered so wishful that they
would have sounded laughable in 2007. We have no way of knowing
what Steve Jobs really thought the potential was, back when the
original product development project began, but it’s hard to believe
he expected annual sales of 216 million units as a reasonable forecast.
It was the relentless pursuit of continuous improvement in the iPhone
user experience that led Jobs and his successors to greatness, and this
required a constant and massive ongoing innovation investment in a
product that was already remarkable, to make it even better.
The next priority for step-on-the-gas products, after investing in
sustaining and expanding the sources of differentiation, is to actually
step on the gas. And that requires marketing expenditures, including
traditional media such as TV, radio, and print ads, along with an
increasing investment in newer marketing methods, such as social
media, email campaigns, and Internet ads. Perhaps an investment to
expand a sales force can help drive sales in areas that are underserved,
as the industrial supply company W. W. Grainger did when it hired
over 500 mobile territory sales representatives to reach customers
far from its stores. This was a large increase in annual expenses, and
the benefits took time to pay off with each new wave of representatives
hired. But, overall, it created substantial value by accessing new
customers and making new, and highly profitable, sales.5
When considering these growth and investment plans, it is important
to use the Reinvestment Effectiveness metric introduced in chapter 4.
Many companies underinvest in growth even when they have strong
revenue growth projections. This reluctance to commit more capital
can stem from an excessive focus on period free cash flow, for example.
Such forecasts typically imply a higher level of Reinvestment Effectiveness—
which, again, is the increase in revenue divided by the amount of
investment over three or five years—than the company has achieved in
the past. But though it’s possible that such new levels of Reinvestment
Effectiveness will be realized, unless a new source of differentiation is
discovered, such underinvestment will likely lead to underperformance
against growth forecasts. Conversely, low rates of both projected revenue
growth and Reinvestment Effectiveness can provide an indication of,
and so help prevent, overinvestment in capacity in relation to projected
sales growth. Such overinvestment often takes the form of building too
much production capacity, or by what we used to call, when I worked
in engineering, “unnecessary gold plating.” (Engineers enjoy impressing
other engineers.)
To effectively make such tradeoffs requires the integration of the
P&L budget and the capital budget, as will be discussed in chapter 9.
Explore-Expansion-Plan Products and Services
Explore-expansion-plan products, which occupy the lower-right quadrant
in figure 29, have above-average profitability, as indicated by a high
RCM. But they don’t score highly in growth because of either low
market growth or a high market share that is more likely to decline
than increase. As a result of such high RCM, even small increases in
growth for these products and services tend to be highly valuable,
while small losses in share can be very costly. So, it is worth taking
the time to try to find new strategic paths to growth either by trying
to expand the market, as Apple did with the iPhone, or by finding
applications in adjacent markets.
But seeking to generate growth from a product with a low growth
score is fraught with risks—for example, extending a brand to an
adjacent product can end up having a negative effect on consumer
perception of the brand. To avoid such possibilities, it’s best to start
by considering lower-risk expansion plans and then introducing risky
alternatives only if the opportunity is significant enough to drive a
desirable risk-return relationship.
The lowest-risk strategy is to pursue growth in existing and adjacent
markets. A dominant market leader sometimes can drive the size
of the market higher by publicizing new uses and expanded fulfilment
of customer needs. As long ago as 1972, McDonalds launched
its breakfast menu, a very successful market-expanding strategy that
originated with a franchisee who showed founder Ray Kroc a sandwich
made with eggs Benedict.
Brand extension is most feasible when there are potential customers
who prefer a competitive product with different attributes but are
open to a switch if adequately enticed to do so. Adjacent subcategories
can be tapped with brand extensions, such as when Cheerios was
extended to Honey Nut Cheerios, to address the sweetened cereal
customer, along with Multi-Grain Cheerios, Very Berry Cheerios,
and the rest of the current 16-product Cheerios line. Each of these
product proliferations undoubtedly cannibalized some sales of the
original Cheerios, but most of these new products probably brought
in many new customers, too. And if Cheerios had stood still, it would
likely have lost share to other products introduced by competition.
Market extensions into new geographies can be fruitful. For many
years, Guinness was viewed as a cold-weather beverage, probably due
to the strong taste, thick viscosity, and a warmer suggested serving
temperature. The theory was that, in warm climates, consumers wanted
beer with a light taste, a watery flow, and a virtue of being best served
extremely cold. The company decided to try a big push into Africa,
which seemed unlikely. As of 2018, the company now boasts in an
advertisement that among their top 10 countries by volume are Nigeria
(#4), Cameroon (#5), Kenya (#6), Ghana (#7), and Ivory Coast
(#9). All these countries are ahead of Canada (#10), known in ads as
the country that “invented ice.” Sometimes we need to overcome our
preconceived notions when we consider brand and market extensions.
The farther the subcategory is from the core market, the riskier the
extension, and that risk manifests itself both in terms of the potential
failure of the new extended product offering and also in potentially
negative feedback effects on the core product. The company can end
up worse off than before the investment. It is important to perform
adequate pretesting but also to have a process for small, regional
introductions that are rapidly and progressively scaled up if successful
feedback is received, but with an eye toward swiftly canceling the
experiment if enough negative feedback emerges. The landscape is
littered with unsuccessful brand extensions, including Harley-Davidson
cake-decorating kits, Chicken Soup Pet Food for the Pet Lover’s Soul,
and Zippo, the women’s perfume that comes in a container that
resembles a lighter.
One common obstacle to the success of explore-expansion-plan
products is a focus on percentage performance measures, such as profit
margins and rates of return. The whole reason we are exploring an
expansion is the high profitability of the product, and many successful
expansions will create value but may bring down the average when
blended in with the high margins and rates of return. So, the type of
growth often involves giving up some margin and return in exchange
for growth; to make this tradeoff, we can rely on the RCE decision
framework, as illustrated earlier.
Products and Services that Need to Earn the Right to Grow
Products in the upper-left quadrant of figure 29 are labeled earnright-
to-grow due to their below-average RCM in an environment
with an above-average growth score. Unfortunately, management
teams often grow such products rapidly because they can, not because
they should. Growth should be slowed on such products while the
product management team considers ways of improving RCM. And
if RCM can indeed be improved, then management will have earned
the right to invest in growth. If not, then their top priorities should
be continuously focused on cost efficiency and capital productivity,
or on divestiture (as we’ll see the next section).
An exception to this occurs when a product is new, does not have
economies of scale, and has not yet advanced down the learning curve
with regard to production efficiencies. In such cases, it may be OK to
grow, yet careful monitoring is required to ensure that the situation
improves over time.
It is easy to see the challenges faced by multi-business companies.
It’s culturally difficult for senior leadership to encourage some of their
product management teams to step on the gas while telling others
to wrack their brains to come up with expansion plans for products
having low-growth scores. Still other product management teams are
told not to grow, but instead to focus on cost efficiency and capital
productivity. Imagine how confusing it can get if products across these
quadrants share sales teams and production facilities!
Nevertheless, products with negative RCM, or such low RCM that
growth adds little value, need to prioritize improving RCM even if it
means losing market share. The likelihood of success in improving
RCM depends on the reasons for RCM’s being low to begin with.
If the product is undifferentiated, no opportunity will arise to drive
premium pricing, so the only possible path to a high RCM is to be the
low-cost producer. This pure focus on minimizing cost and capital
often seems more achievable than it is. Only when unique production
or distribution methods are employed can a sustainable cost advantage
be achieved and protected. Otherwise, cost and capital reductions
will simply be matched by competitors, and prices will be “competed
down” to eliminate the surplus value.
A company has a greater chance of success when its products
are differentiated and are already commanding premium pricing,
but also when RCM is low because of inefficient cost structures and
unproductive asset utilization. The identification and implementation
of industry best-practices in manufacturing, logistics, and service can
bring cost and capital levels in line, and the benefits will flow directly
into an improved RCM.
The only big risk occurs when the high-cost profile is achieved not
because of inefficiency but rather because of the higher-cost nature
of the product or service, especially when the higher cost is driven
by attributes that produce the differentiation. Consider a restaurant
where extra waitstaff improves service, a key element of differentiation
relative to other local eateries. Perhaps leaving more space between
tables improves the ambiance, which is positively perceived by patrons,
but this reduces the number of tables and the amount of sales per
dollar of capital. Maybe the investment in higher-quality ingredients,
such as fresher vegetables and better cuts of meat and fish, improves
the most important differentiator—the quality of the food. With all
this differentiation, the restaurant may attract more patrons who are
willing to pay higher prices, generating maybe 50% or even 75% more
revenue per patron—but its costs will be much higher, too. In such a
situation, a blind focus on cost control might lead to a reduction in
staff, an increase in the number of tables, and even a downgrade in
the quality of food ingredients. These efforts may dramatically reduce
differentiation, and as a result, revenue may decline more than cost. It
is imperative, therefore, that cost inefficiencies be distinguished from
desirable investments in differentiation.
Because these earn-right-to-grow products are frequently the most
misunderstood, they often have the most misaligned strategies applied
to sell them. Traditional strategic thought says if you are in a fastgrowing
market, “then just grow!” A common assumption has it that
growing markets must be profitable, but this is certainly not always
the case, at least not for all products in such markets. By balancing
the emphasis on growth and return, the Fortuna Advisors Growth/
RCM Matrix helps managers identify and appropriately drive success
in such product areas.
Products and Services that Should Be Monetized
The combination of being below average on both the growth score
and RCM provides little hope for success in most circumstances. At
times opportunities will present themselves to rejuvenate a brand,
reimagine a technology, or restructure inefficient manufacturing and
distribution processes. Yet for every home run it seems there are far
too many strikeouts, especially when the turnaround is undertaken
within a large, multi-business company. Even when business-unit turnarounds
work, they often come at the expense of neglect of the most
successful businesses, so it’s like winning a battle but losing the war.
As mentioned above, sometimes the only way to divert management
attention away from this type of business is a sale or spin-off.
The private equity industry is far better suited to achieving successful
turnarounds, thanks to its much more powerful incentive and governance
structures, as well as to their ability to reduce public transparency
along with the short-termism that comes with the quarterly earnings
cycle. Nevertheless, private equity buyers don’t like to pay premium
prices, so management often hesitates and instead holds onto poor
performers to “fix” them and improve their value. This prolongs the
drain of value by distracting management from maximizing value in
their step-on-the-gas products and businesses.
The situation must be studied on a case-by-case basis. In most
companies, though, management will find that selling these businesses
helps them to focus on the areas where they can create more value,
even if the sale happens at a price below what management really
thinks the business could be worth. And beyond the immediate benefit
of exiting an inferior business, divestitures can simplify the company,
reducing overheads and enabling simpler management processes.
Notes
1 Gregory V. Milano, “Are You Wasting Time on Poor Performers?,” CFO.com,
accessed July 8, 2011, https://fortuna-advisors.com/2011/07/08/are-you-wastingtime-
on-poor-performers/.
2 A term used in allocations where resources are spread evenly across segments.
3 For this simple illustration, data was gathered from CapitalIQ for Foot Locker,
L Brands, Ross Stores, The Gap, The TJX Companies, and Urban Outfitters.
4 Kevin Kelly, Out of Control: The New Biology of Machines (London: Fourth Estate,
1995).
5 If these sales and marketing efforts pay off, volumes will increase, so there may
be necessary investments in production capacity, logistical capacity, and even
supplier capacity. This should be intentionally decided on after considering adding
new volume to reduce the risk of unnecessarily adding idle capacity. Unutilized
capacity increases fixed-cost and capital charges per unit, and can dramatically
reduce overall RCE, valuation multiples, and share price.