INVESTORS SOMETIMES REMARK, “That’s a great company
but it’s not a great stock.” This can have different meanings, but it
often refers to a large, highly profitable company that is well regarded
and trades at a high valuation. So, it is a great company that’s valued
accordingly, but the investor doesn’t see much room to earn a good
return. Indeed, many great companies have had stagnating or even
fading share prices for extended periods.
Consider Microsoft, by all accounts a great company. As of
mid-2018 the company was worth about $850 billion and had over
120,000 employees. For decades it has played a major role in transforming
the usability and accessibility of computers for everyday consumers
and employees around the globe. In August of 1997, Microsoft even
invested $150 million in Apple preferred stock, an investment that
some described as saving its competitor. Indeed, this cash infusion
helped ensure that the world would benefit from all the innovation
that Apple has produced since then. Microsoft went public on March
13, 1986, and over a nearly 14-year period (ending on December 27,
1999), investors realized a 59% compound annual return on their
investment—enough to turn $10,000 into over $6 million. Microsoft
was clearly a great company and a great stock.
But then Microsoft’s share price languished for more than a decade.
A dollar invested in its stock on December 27, 1999, wouldn’t be
worth a dollar again for more than 14 years. Zero return over such a
long period is by all accounts a pretty bad return on investment. But
there is absolutely no doubt it was still a great company. To management’s
credit, over the four and a half years from the day the stock
finally crawled over that 1999 peak to the end of 2018, the stock has
delivered returns of 24% per year. Once again, Microsoft was both a
great company and a great stock.
The message to corporate executives should be clear: It’s not
enough to be a great company. To also be a great stock requires
continuous improvement. Whether an investor has a short horizon—
say, a day or a week—or a longer horizon of several years, the
objective is to earn a decent total shareholder return (TSR). So, what
does it take to deliver strong TSR and to be a great stock? In 2016,
we published a comprehensive article1 that reported the findings of
our study of the drivers of TSR in technology companies. This study
was particularly noteworthy, since so many believe that the kind
of economic analysis discussed in this book doesn’t really apply to
the valuation of the tech sector, with its economic idiosyncrasies.
We proved them wrong.
We studied the operating and stock market performance of no
fewer than 169 publicly traded tech companies with ending market
capitalization of at least $1 billion that were listed from 2004 through
2015. We collected data for the companies on eight different performance
metrics for the 12-year period starting in 2004 and running
through the end of 2015. As listed in figure 21, the metrics included
five widely measured and monitored performance indicators as
well as three cash-value measures that were developed by Fortuna
Advisors.
Widely Used Measures
(1) Sales Growth
(2) Gross Margin
(3) Operating Margin
(4) EBITDA margin
(5) Return on Equity (ROE)
Cash Value Measures
(6) Gross Business Return
(7) (change in) Residual Cash Earnings (ΔRCE)
(8) Residual Cash Margin
Figure 21—Measures Used in Tech Study
Our next step was to divide our 12 years of operating data and
performance measures into 10 rolling three-year periods with endpoints
in each year from 2006 to 2015. The first period runs from 2004 to
2006, the next from 2005 to 2007, and so on. Then, for every one of
the eight operating measures, we assigned each of the companies to
one of three performance tiers—high, medium, and low. For example,
the companies with the highest cumulative average growth rates in
three-year sales were put in tier 1, and those with the lowest salesgrowth
rates went into tier 3. For each performance metric, we then
compared the median TSR of the high-performance companies in
tier 1 with the median TSR of the low-performance companies in tier
3. This difference gave us a sense of the importance of each metric
as a driver of TSR in tech.
It was the change in RCE (ΔRCE), as a percentage of beginning
assets, that turned out to be the strongest driver of TSR, as reflected
in the large difference between the median TSR of the best ΔRCE
performers (tier 1) and the worst (tier 3). When we aggregated the
10 rolling three-year periods in our sample, the top ΔRCE companies
had median annual TSR that was over 14% higher per year than that
of the bottom ΔRCE companies.
The next two most value-related metrics were sales growth and
ROE, in that order. This makes sense, since growth and return tend
to be the two most important drivers of RCE, which of course clarifies
the tradeoff between growth and return. The clear message from
these findings is that if you want your tech company to be a great
stock, improve your RCE. Typically, this requires a combination of
sales growth and improved returns.
Many investors have been bedazzled by exotic tech valuation
metrics, such as value per click or per eyeball. So, they are usually
surprised to hear that RCE is the most important driver of tech TSR.
Sure, some tech companies attract extraordinary valuations for a
host of reasons that don’t show up in current RCE improvements.
Sometimes it’s a general expectation of future RCE improvements.
At other times it’s a technology or market breakthrough with no clear
sign of how the opportunity will translate into profitability. Often the
results grow into the valuation. But sometimes these optimistic valuations
turn out to be inflated and will revert to a more normal level
over time. But if these gyrations happen in all industries, they seem
to happen more often, and to a greater degree, in tech and related
industries like biotechnology.
Nevertheless, when we examine the whole tech industry over
time, we find that improving RCE is what drives TSR. Just as in other
industries, then, the objective should be to grow RCE. Continuous
improvement in RCE leads to strong TSR the vast majority of the
time, and more so than any other metric I’ve studied.
When presenting to corporate management teams and at conferences,
I have found that the words “continuous improvement” often
trigger defensive reactions that are rooted in perceptions of and
concerns about volatility and cyclicality. A participant might ask,
“How can you expect me to improve every year when the market is
highly variable?” Often, they describe this variability as being driven
by volatility in commodity prices, exchange rates, demand, and other
factors.
Perhaps what is most surprising is that these comments don’t
just come from business leaders in volatile or cyclical industries, such
as energy or commodity chemicals. Even those in relatively stable
businesses tend to be overly concerned about the effects of volatility.
Reflecting on these trends and conversations, I’ve become convinced
that these perceptions of volatility and cyclicality largely derive from
managers’ tendency to view their own company’s historical trends as
a broadly applicable, industry-wide frame of reference or benchmark.
In the case of highly volatile businesses, which routinely experience
both up- and down-swings in profits amounting to 5% or even
10% of sales, managers are likely to need to respond decisively to
such swings. When upturns happen, managers need to find available
capacity, keep customers happy, and simultaneously maintain a reasonable
level of structure and organization. And the downturns are often
more demanding, since a reduction in orders can beget a whirlwind
of layoffs, shortened shifts, asset sales, and just about every type of
crisis management imaginable. The relative calm when profits shift
by only 2% of sales seems almost like a vacation.
But now let’s consider another leadership team—one that operates
in a highly stable business that has never seen a profit swing of more
than 2% of sales. When it does swing 2%, it feels like a momentous
event, even though the same level of volatility seemed like a vacation
in the prior example. Attempts to explain how such volatility
is relatively low are met with resistance. The truth is, regardless of
the actual absolute amount of volatility that a business faces, many
managements think of their business as being volatile. Hence their
skepticism about the term “continuous improvement,” which they
mistakenly perceive as implying the need to improve every single year.
I have advised many oil and gas exploration and production companies,
and the volatility they experience is positively gut-wrenching.
On June 30, 2014, for example, the price of a barrel of West Texas
Intermediate oil was $106. Just over 19 months later it bottomed at
$26—a decline of over 75%. How many companies can survive a 75%
decline in their selling price? And for many oil and gas service and
equipment companies, it turned out even worse. In some cases, sales
volumes and prices dropped so low that it was no longer economical
to keep producing. Hundreds of thousands of employees lost their
jobs, and hundreds of billions in market capitalization disappeared.
That’s volatility.
Nonetheless, even companies facing very little volatility can find it
difficult to improve every year. I don’t expect any company to improve
smoothly every year, for much the same reasons that I don’t expect
a company’s stock price to go up every year. But what is important
is not that a company always improves, but that its management is
always striving to do so. Some external factors will get in the way
some years. And internal factors will have to be dealt with, as well.
But if we are developing and executing sound strategies, RCE will
improve over time—and TSR will follow.
The U.S. Declaration of Independence recognizes the “pursuit
of happiness” as an unalienable right. It doesn’t say that all U.S. citizens
will be happy, only that they have the right to pursue happiness.
Along these lines, maybe we should describe the corporate goal as
the “continuous pursuit of improvement.”
A corporate focus on multiyear continuous improvement can
also help reduce the pressure exerted by relatively minor short-term
concerns that otherwise end up excessively consuming management’s
time and attention. Consider a fire in a supplier’s plant that shrinks
supply and causes a temporary spike in commodity prices, resulting
in a short-term increase in your costs. You know that in a few
months the plant will be back on line and the commodity price will
revert. So long as the spike isn’t threatening the survivability of your
company, why waste much time worrying about it? Companies that
are too focused on achieving quarterly goals risk being consumed by
every variance, small or large—even those that are temporary. Sure,
they will be able explain why all the factors that hurt the company’s
performance were out of their control. But is this really a justifiable
use of management’s time? In most cases, the answer is no.
This is not to say you shouldn’t take action to mitigate the effects
of such spikes. Maybe there is a substitute commodity that, though
usually more expensive, could be used during the price-spike period.
Maybe some of the effects can and should be temporarily passed on
to your customers. But when making such a decision, you should
take care to avoid a temporary cost recapture that ends up either
reducing long-term revenue or raising long-term costs. For example,
if customers feel they are being price gouged, they may stay away for
a long time. There is a gas station near my home that raised prices
excessively, to my mind, after hurricane Sandy. Seven years have passed
since then, and I still haven’t gone back. While there may be no legal
penalties associated with this type of predatory pricing, the loss of
business is likely to be a far bigger cost.
And because managements are often faced with tradeoffs between
near-term and longer-term revenues and costs, it may be more accurate
to describe the corporate objective not as continuous improvement, but
rather as cumulative improvement. Of course, we want management to
make continual efforts to identify and achieve improvements. In other
words, we want the managerial inputs into the value-creation process
to be continuously provided and improving in quality if not quantity.
But when evaluating the measurable output of the value-creation
process—say, in the form of RCE—cumulative improvement may be
the most reliable and realistic description of the goal. For, even after
we take into consideration the ups and downs of the business, and if
we do all the right things, our RCE may in fact not get bigger every
year. Yet when we look back in a few years, we will end up reporting
a significant cumulative increase in the measure.
This brings me to a recurring, and critical, question raised in this
book: Would you, as the CEO of a public company, be willing to take
actions that are almost certain to be negatively received by investors in
the short run but, once the new initiatives pan out, are likely to drive
your share price up significantly in a few years? Say the stock would
drop from $20 down to $18 or $17 over the next few months but will
have risen to between $30 and $40 in two or three years. Would you
still take your proposed actions? Most will recognize the inherent
value of such a tradeoff when it’s posed hypothetically. But, in practice,
many managers are all too willing to forgo such investments to
avoid even a relatively small reduction in value over the short term.
We cannot eliminate cyclicality or volatility, but we can do our
best to ensure that each peak is higher, and each trough shallower,
than the last. Figure 22 shows how this plays out over time.
Figure 22—Continuous Improvement in a Cyclical Business
If our goal is to maximize results this year, we will focus too
much attention on dampening cyclical effects to meet our quarterly
or annual goals or investor guidance. Sometimes this leads to cutting
deals that really don’t yield enough value over the long term. For
example, say that your customers are offered unusual discounts to
place an order at the end of a fiscal year or quarter that otherwise
would have occurred at the start of the following period. Overall, the
shareholders make less money, but in the short term management
hits a quarterly number. An owner wouldn’t do that.
If, by contrast, the goal is to maximize performance three to five
years from now, business managers will spend more time identifying,
evaluating, and implementing investments and efficiencies that have
enduring effects throughout the cycle. Longer-term managers buy
assets at the bottom of the cycle when they are selling for a fraction
of the price, compared to short-term managers who want to buy
capacity only at the peak, at a time when they don’t know what else
to do with all the cash they are generating. Longer-term managers
also take the other side of the bad year-end deal above: They accept
unusually large shipments (at big discounts, thereby reducing their
own cost of goods sold) at times when it’s convenient to support the
quarterly accounting figures of their short-term-focused supplier.
It sounds simple, but the continuous-improvement mindset
requires a constant, deliberate effort to develop and maintain. First,
it requires a good understanding of where we are now in the business
and market cycle versus peers as well as the broader capital market
on every important dimension of growth and efficiency. And this
requires overcoming “recency bias” that, as we discussed previously,
can lead managers to extrapolate recent conditions as if they were
to continue indefinitely.
Second, we need to also understand the elements of performance
at the top and bottom of the last cycle. Did we do relatively better
when times were good or when they were tough? This sounds like
a straightforward metric, but to understand it requires a thorough
understanding of the company’s business model in terms of fixed
and variable costs—and this includes consideration of financing costs
such as interest and even dividends, which are not contractual but
behave like fixed costs.
Unfortunately, many companies make predictably poor decisions
as a result of neglecting to incorporate cycles into their plans
and forecasts. An example would be a very large capacity-expanding
investment when demand is at its peak and circumstances appear
most favorable. By making such an investment, a company ends up
in a tough situation in the next downturn, and this can accelerate
the decline in its share price and potentially damage its reputation
with investors.
At the top of the business cycle, many companies also voluntarily
absorb more risk by insourcing services or acquiring suppliers
to reduce costs. But inadequate attention is often paid to the reduction
in flexibility that comes from converting these variable costs to
fixed costs. Since the cost savings are typically estimated based on
smooth forecasts with relatively constant growth and margins, when
a downturn eventually arrives these companies are faced with costly
excess capacity. When companies buy these services externally, they
can simply scale back on them. But when services and the like are
insourced, they bear the burden of fixed leases and equipment as
well as of full-time staff who are much harder to flex up and down.
Third, and most important, we need to identify the desired future
state of the company. Without worrying about how to get there, which
elements of the business model should be changed over the next three
to five years? How big should we be? How profitable? How much
should we invest? We can start by understanding what competitors
do better than our own company. Are their products and services of
higher quality? Is their response time quicker to customer needs? Do
they produce at a lower cost? Which of these benefits would be useful
to adopt? Where can we leapfrog them? Which attributes would be
adequately valued by customers to warrant the effort?
And if we consider the needs of customers—as of course we
should—are there better ways to serve them? Sometimes they don’t
even know what they need because they haven’t thought of it; but
perhaps we can find a way to improve their experience. None of us
knew we “needed” an iPhone, but that didn’t stop Apple.
Once the desired future state is established, the path needs to be
considered. And this is where goal-setting ends and planning starts.
We know how high we want to stretch and we’ve set some general
parameters about what “there” looks like. Now we must develop and
weight alternative paths to get there—and then develop a plan, which
is the subject of the next chapter.
As you may recall from chapter 3, we recommend setting performance
targets based on the prior year’s RCE. Some have questioned
whether continuous improvement motivated in this way can be sustainable—
consider a manager faced with a target based on exceptionally
good performance the year before, for example. But this actually serves
to unlock the true performance potential of a business.
There likely is a limit to how high margins can go, and asset intensity
can fall, as a result of competitive forces; at large scale, organic
growth alone usually isn’t sufficient. But there isn’t a limit to how
much profitable growth can be achieved if management is creative
and has the right incentives.
Managers in these situations are motivated to move beyond incremental
improvement and to find alternative solutions to adding value,
whether that means acquiring, moving into adjacent markets, seeking
out value-adding synergies, or pursuing other more-innovative
strategies (Berkshire Hathaway is a good example of a company
that consistently does this). And this is exactly how great companies
regularly exceed expectations.
The pursuit of continuous improvement is very different from the
typical incrementalism of managing quarter to quarter and extrapolating
annual budgets. The benefits are clear, but the obstacles to getting
there are many. Company leaders face the pressures of providing
guidance to investors and analysts, running quarterly earnings calls,
and dealing with the increasingly rapid news cycle. Adding to and
complicating these challenges are the counterproductive incentives
provided by today’s prevailing practices of performance measurement
and compensation.
Developing a continuous improvement mindset in a large organization
is hard work. It begins with a firm and explicit commitment by top
management to the task of creating long-run value. It involves reconfiguring
goals, management processes, and especially management
incentives, to emphasize “more is better”; and it demands constant
communication, training, and coaching of at least those near the
top of the organization and, in most cases, even some up and down
the ranks. But if it involves changes in financial decision-making and
processes, the expected outcome is nothing less than a fundamental
change in corporate culture.
Notes
1 Gregory V. Milano, Arshia Chatterjee, and David Fedigan, “Drivers of Shareholder
Returns in Tech Industries (or How to Make Sense of Amazon’s Market
Value),” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 28, no. 3 (2016): 48–55.