ODDS ARE, WHEN Mick Jagger and Keith Richards wrote the
line “you can’t always get what you want,” they weren’t thinking
about the relationship between executives and their shareholders. The
difference between the expressed demands of investors and what they
value, based on their actions in the stock market, probably wasn’t top
of mind for Mick and Keith when they went on to write: “if you try
sometimes, you just might find, you get what you need.” But as it
turns out, these transgenerational lyrics convey an important message
that executives should embrace.
Corporate leaders must determine the performance measures
that, when improved, will drive shareholder value higher over time.
They must relentlessly pursue improvement in these measures even
when the strategies and tactics required to lift the chosen measures
appear to conflict with what their investors claim to want. That’s
right: Like the rest of us, shareholders don’t always know what’s in
their own best interest. So, for corporate management to do the best
job possible, they must give their owners what they need, which may
not always be what they think they want.
The anthropologist Margaret Mead once remarked, “What people
say, what people do and what they say they do are entirely different
things.”1 To recast this phrase for our purposes, “It’s better to go by
what investors do than what they say.” There is an abundance of
rhetoric on how performance influences share prices. Every corporate
executive is subject to a continuous barrage of often misguided
viewpoints and undue pressures, with their shareholders frequently
expressing their opinions about the strategies and tactics they themselves
believe will lead to a higher share price. But many investor
demands are completely, or at least largely, at odds with what extensive
capital market research demonstrates actually drives a share price
higher over time. What are executives to do?
A chief executive scarcely faces a more important managerial
policy decision than establishing the performance measures for rewarding
performance throughout the company. It is said that “what gets
measured gets done,”2 and my experience has shown this to be an
understatement. That motto should actually read: “what gets measured
gets extremely aggressively done.” Executives must consider the behaviors
that their metrics encourage and must ensure consistency between
what they incentivize and what they want accomplished. If the strategy
involves innovation, market share expansion, and substantial revenue
growth, yet the performance measures motivate only price hikes, cost
efficiency, and capital productivity, then the company won’t be innovative—
and it won’t win market share or deliver substantial revenue
growth. You get what you pay for, to coin a phrase.
Unfortunately, almost all performance measures are imperfect
when used in isolation. Since most individual metrics represent only a
piece of the performance measurement puzzle, at times such measures
will decline, due to positive events, or increase, as a result of poor
performance. These measurement shortcomings often stem from
using metrics that overlook important benefits of corporate investment.
Using such incomplete measures to evaluate performance is
akin to squeezing one side of a balloon—the air is simply displaced,
leaving a distorted view.
Such measures pose the risk of motivating decisions that are
liable to undermine both performance and share value. Many
companies maintain tight managerial controls to restrict precisely
the kinds of behaviors these incentives can encourage. It seems
crazy, not to mention incredibly inefficient—instead, why not use
measures that more reliably go up when good things happen and
go down when bad things happen? Defining such measures may
seem easier said than done, but it really can be accomplished.
And when such better measures are implemented, then we can
get rid of the excessive controls—and let the incentives motivate
the right behavior.
For example, revenue growth is in most cases a significant driver
of long-run value and, to some observers, more growth may always
seem to be an unambiguous indicator of success. But would a narrowminded
focus on revenue growth encourage managers to terminate
a business relationship with a very unprofitable customer? Such an
action can preserve value even as revenue declines, by halting the
destruction of value. Or, in another situation, consider a potential new
product or service being sold at such a large discount that the resulting
revenue doesn’t even cover the variable costs involved in delivering
it. An incentive driven purely by revenue growth may encourage the
sale, but it would destroy value. Yes, revenue growth is extremely
important, as will be extensively discussed later, but companies that
emphasize revenue growth above all else are likely encouraging valuereducing
behaviors.
Most long-serving executives recognized these shortcomings of
revenue growth decades ago. Many began measuring profit, so only
profitable growth was pursued. Problem solved? Not exactly…. It
turns out that the unfettered pursuit of profit growth can encourage
heavy investments that do deliver profit but not enough to cover
the required return, meaning the cost of capital, of the investments.
Managers can gather capital from lenders and equity investors; and as
long as the investments they make generate enough cash flow to cover
the depreciation and interest expense, profit increases. And if they
reinvest retained earnings, there isn’t even any interest—they simply
have to cover depreciation to improve profit. As would be expected,
companies emphasizing profit alone tend to overinvest, particularly in
very low-return investments. They wind up carrying a much heavier
load of assets and capital, which can end up dragging down their share
price—like a runner weighed down by a sack of potatoes.
To be fair, many executives realize that an excessive focus on profits
leads to bad motivation. But rather than improving the measure to
make it more complete and so eliminate the bad incentives, they put
in place tight policies and procedures to constrain capital investment.
They push down “required assumptions” and forecasts, they establish
unrealistically high hurdle rates, and they impose a general atmosphere
of skepticism to make investments proposed by their business units
and operations appear less desirable. This way, they can control their
organization’s insatiable appetite for new investments and can limit
total capital spending within what seems to be a reasonable overall
capital budget, often set based on an arbitrary percentage of sales.
But I digress….
The profit measure that gets the most attention is earnings per
share, or EPS. Put simply, EPS is the net income of the company divided
by the number of shares outstanding. For over 20 years I’ve said that,
paradoxically, EPS would be a much better performance measure if
nobody knew we were measuring it! But instead, it’s the measure
that is most watched, most discussed, most estimated, most analyzed,
and, unfortunately, most managed. Every business or financial television
and radio program, and every financial newspaper article, talks
about EPS. Brokerage analysts, as is their wont, estimate future EPS,
and many investors and commentators wrongly view the analysts’
consensus as a prediction of the future. When quarterly earnings are
announced, everyone looks to see if actual EPS “beats” the consensus.
The headlines read, “XYZ announced earnings today and fell short
of consensus EPS by $0.03”—and everybody shudders.
Are there problems with EPS? Let me count the ways. First, the
net income used to determine EPS is based on the accrual accounting
rules in generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. As any
corporate manager could tell you, GAAP rules are readily massaged
by setting up or releasing reserves for potential liabilities, such as
inventory losses, doubtful accounts receivable, or future expected or
potential warranty exposures.
Second, net income can be “protected” by managements that
occasionally—or not so occasionally—take extraordinary charges
to set up restructuring reserves that are later used to shield earnings
from costs. And these restructuring charges are often excluded
by management and investors who look at “adjusted” EPS. If EPS
could somehow be insulated from both arbitrary reserve accounting
and this so-called “big bath” accounting, it would be a much more
reliable measure.
As Warren Buffett wrote in his 1988 annual report, “Even honest
and well-intentioned managements sometimes stretch GAAP a bit in
order to present figures they think will more appropriately describe
their performance. Both the smoothing of earnings and the ‘big bath’
quarter are ‘white lie’ techniques employed by otherwise upright
managements.” Buffett went on, “Then there are managers who
actively use GAAP to deceive and defraud. They know that many investors
and creditors accept GAAP results as gospel. So, these charlatans
interpret the rules ‘imaginatively’ and record business transactions
in ways that technically comply with GAAP but actually display an
economic illusion to the world.” Bear in mind that Buffett wrote
these words more than 30 years ago, and they are as true today as
they were then.
Third, GAAP requires that R&D investments be charged as annual
expenses against EPS. Unless all the benefits of R&D are expected
during the fiscal year, such expensing would distort EPS and reduce
the usefulness of the measure. Companies that invest heavily in R&D
tend to show lower EPS, while companies that are rapidly increasing
their R&D spending typically show lower EPS growth or, in extreme
cases, even a decline. The same logic applies to brand-building advertising,
but since the disclosure of such investments is less consistent
than for R&D, it is harder to evaluate the effects.
One company with heavy R&D investments that are rapidly
increasing is Amazon.com. In 2003, Amazon’s spending on technology
and content—generally considered R&D3—was $257 million, a
sizeable investment. It increased to $1.7 billion over the next seven
years through 2010, for an astounding annual growth rate of 31%
per year. Many companies reduce their rate of investment once they
achieve scale, but no siree, not Amazon! Over the following seven
years, through 2017, Amazon’s R&D jumped every year, reaching a
whopping $22.6 billion in 2017, for a 44% annualized growth rate.
The company increased R&D at a rate never seen before for such a
large company. And in 2017 its R&D investment was fully 7.5 times
its net income.
Amazon is a particularly interesting case because of the large gap
between its profitability and share price. Because of this, considerable
skepticism has been expressed about its high valuation. But as I just
pointed out, GAAP earnings provide a distorted picture of a company’s
true “earnings power” whenever large and increasing investments
in R&D are expensed as if the benefits were expected to be entirely
realized in the current year. In Amazon’s case, the benefits are more
likely to be spread out over several years, if not decades. Later on in
this book, we will show that Amazon has likely been appropriately
valued using a performance measure that more thoughtfully accounts
for the company’s unconventionally high R&D expenditure. But in
the meantime, back to the pitfalls of EPS.
The flip side of this observation that heavy R&D can make earnings
an unreliable guide to value is that companies can manage EPS
by “managing” R&D. If they think they may have trouble hitting
consensus EPS, they can cut a few R&D programs and, ipso facto,
they meet the consensus. Never mind that they may have sacrificed
their future to meet a quarterly performance target…they hit the
target! If R&D and brand-building advertising were treated by GAAP
as a capital investment rather than an expense—and thus in the same
way as corporate investments in property, plant, and equipment—EPS
would be a much more reliable measure.
A fourth problem with EPS relates to the share count, a.k.a.
the denominator in determining EPS. It’s true that many investors
view “per-share” measures as being of great importance, since they
can relate them to the per-share price. Any increase in shares dilutes
the EPS, while any decrease in shares tends to drive EPS accretion
or increases. A strict focus on the share-count impact on EPS would
suggest that dilution is bad, and that reducing the share count is good.
Unfortunately for those who think this way, research by my colleagues
and me shows that this logic is flawed. For example, companies that
generate EPS growth by buying back shares to reduce their share
count tend to have declining price-to-earnings multiples that reduce
the potential share price benefit that accrues from shrinking the share
count.
A rising share count, typically resulting from issuing shares to
raise funds for acquisitions or other growth investments, tends to be
associated with higher share-price performance. The obsession with
buybacks that has led the S&P 500 members to deploy $2.9 trillion to
buy back their own stock over the five years ending in 2018 was fueled,
in many cases, by a misguided emphasis on reducing share count to
increase EPS. As with arbitrary reserve and “big-bath” accounting,
if we could insulate EPS from financially engineered changes in the
share count, EPS would be a much more reliable measure.
After both EPS and operating cash flow, EBITDA (earnings before
interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization) is the third most-cited
performance metric in the “management discussion and analysis”
section of public companies’ annual financial statements.4 EBITDA
was popularized by leveraged buyout (LBO) firms, and later on also
by private equity firms, that had a business model of finding underperforming
companies that had just finished large capital investment
programs. For years the investment banking industry has also valued
companies based on multiples of EBITDA. This approach may have
been derived from free cash flow, which, when forecasted over time,
is the basis for the discounted cash flow valuation model. Free cash
flow, or FCF, is simply the cash generated less the cash invested back
into the business. It’s what’s freely available to both equity and debt
investors. Despite the insights derived from evaluating free cash flow
over time, most financial folk realize that as a period measure of
performance, FCF is deeply flawed. To maximize free cash flow in
a single period, the majority of companies would be encouraged to
simply stop investing in the future!
An interesting example of this is provided by the case of Walmart
from 1981 through 1996. Over this 16-year period, Walmart’s FCF was
negative in all but one year—and it was only slightly positive in that single
year. The company generated literally tons of cash (how’s that for a
unit of measure?), but invested more than 100% of it in the future,
increasing its store count from 330 to over 2,600 and exploding its
growing total revenue from $1.7 billion to over $94 billion. Despite
its persistently negative FCF, the company’s total shareholder return
was more than 4,500% over the period. (Good thing it wasn’t trying to
maximize free cash flow each year!)
Investment bankers realize that profit measures are distorted
by noncash charges, such as depreciation and amortization, so they
use EBITDA in their multiples. Although the noncash charges do
distort profit measures, the lack of adequate recognition of the cost
of capital is even worse with EBITDA than for profit measures. If a
company were to invest $100 million and realized only $1 of cash
flow, EBITDA rises by—wait for it— $1. The cash flow doesn’t even
have to cover depreciation or interest expense; any cash flow makes
EBITDA increase. So, while EBITDA might provide useful valuation
insights, it’s terrible as a period performance measure, and it encourages
even more overinvestment than profit measures.
The important thread connecting my preceding arguments is
that revenue growth, profit growth, and EBITDA growth simply
don’t recognize the cost of the investments required to produce such
growth. And using FCF as a period measure exaggerates the cost of
investment by expensing it all in the year of the investment, instead of
gradually over time. So, the next evolution in performance measurement
was tracking some form of profit or cash flow in relation to
the cumulative investment that has been made, in order to realize the
profit or cash flow. Thus, rate-of-return measures were conceived to
combine the income statement, which reflects profit, and the balance
sheet, which reflects investment.
Rates of return are a significant improvement over measures that
focus on revenue, profit, or cash flow alone. For the first time in this
evolution of performance metrics, we have a means of trading off
profit margin and asset intensity—two potential performance drivers
that can at times be at odds with each other. Making an asset-intensive
investment? That can be fine, as long as it will generate enough of a
profit margin to maintain a decent rate of return. Have a low-profitmargin
business? That can be fine too, as long as it uses very little
capital. But whether asset-intensive or asset-light, businesses deserve
the infusion of new investment funds only when they can generate
an incremental profit margin that is large enough, in relation to the
additional capital required, to deliver an adequate rate of return over
time. Rates of return have revolutionized the process of managing
a portfolio of different businesses by allowing comparisons across
varying business models.
Many rate-of-return measures can be used, including return on
net assets (RONA), return on invested capital (ROIC), and return on
equity (ROE). For a typical industrial company, RONA and ROIC
are widely viewed as effective, because they measure the performance
of the business without regard to the proportions that are
financed by debt or equity. Yet for financial institutions, where all
but the longest-term debt is considered funding debt, and the interest
on that debt is akin to a cost of goods sold, ROE tends to be
favored. Nevertheless, in each of these cases, the return measures
allow tradeoffs between the income statement and the balance sheet
that are not evident in the revenue, profit, and cash flow measures
discussed above.
All is not rosy with rates of return, though, because all rate-ofreturn
measures are percentage measures. As such, they are measures
of the quality of corporate investment only, but not the quantity of
such investment. Would you rather invest $100 earning a 50% return
or a million dollars earning 40%? This may seem like an academic
question, but it’s highly practical. When it comes to creating value,
size matters.
Consider a management team with an annual incentive entirely
based on improving ROIC. They have been very successful, they
currently manage about $1 billion of invested capital, and they have
increased their ROIC from 20% only five years ago to 40% during the
year that just ended. Investors were undoubtedly impressed, and the
share price performed well. Management, too, was paid well.
They ponder whether to invest $250 million to acquire a smaller,
privately owned competitor with considerable cost overlap. With
a reasonable estimate of cost synergies, the acquisition will deliver
a 30% return, quite a bit higher than the company’s 10% cost of
capital. The acquisition seems valuable; but as management prepares
to make the acquisition, the head of financial planning and analysis
shares the table in figure 2 and points out that, after the acquisition,
the returns of the consolidated company will be lower—so they
will all be paid less.
Current + Acquisition = Consolidated
Net Operating
Profit After Taxes 400 + 75 = 475
Invested Capital 1,000 + 250 = 1,250
Return on
Invested Capital 40% 30% 38%
Figure 2—Rate of Return Dilution
Even though the acquisition is expected to deliver a high-enough
return to create value for shareholders, it’s not as high as that of the
base business. So, when it’s added to the mix, the average ROIC will
decline. This decline in both ROIC and incentive pay could induce
management to pass up this valuable acquisition that is expected to
earn three times the cost of capital. If they choose to pursue the deal,
either management will be paid less when ROIC declines, or they
will negotiate new targets with the compensation committee. How
do committee members distinguish when management is suffering a
true, undeserved compensation shortfall from when they are simply
trying to negotiate their way out of the consequences of poor decisionmaking?
The negotiation process takes time, and while the haggling
ensues, the target company is sitting there waiting for closure…or
another suitor.
Why not use a measure that better reflects when both good and
bad things happen? We will get to that shortly, but before leaving the
rate of return topic, it’s important to note that this all can happen in
reverse, too—with potentially worse consequences.
Consider another company, again with $1 billion in capital, earning
merely a 5% ROIC. This may sound low, given the discussion
above; but according to the S&P Capital IQ database, almost 50 of
the nonfinancial members of the S&P 500 had a ROIC below 5% in
2017—so this example applies broadly.
If the company has a cost of capital of 10%, the management
team undoubtedly realizes they are underperforming, so they are
likely to focus on improvements, especially if the members’ incentives
are tied to improving ROIC. Just as in the case above, this can lead to
really awkward incentives.
Consider a $500 million acquisition that management projects
will deliver a 15% incremental return on invested capital, which is
adequately above the 10% cost of capital. After some consideration,
the board of directors approves the acquisition, and management
closes the deal three months later. The announcement is well received,
and management celebrates their anticipated success.
Unfortunately, during the integration of the acquired company,
it is discovered that a number of key managerial assumptions used
in developing their forecast weren’t based on accurate information.
Some buildings that had to be exited turned out to have higher than
expected lease cancellation costs. Certain of the management information
systems weren’t compatible with the acquirer’s systems. But
the big one was the discovery that the main products sold by the
acquired company weren’t faltering due to an inept sales and marketing
program, as previously thought. There were actual product flaws
in the eyes of the customers, and new market entrants were stealing
market share almost effortlessly. The company still had a loyal base
of customers, though the growth forecast prepared before the deal
now morphed into, at best, a flat volume profile—despite the growth
of the overall product market.
As each unexpected obstacle to success was discovered, management
lowered its forecast, and after several months they realized that
what they thought would be a 15% return would be lucky to end up
at 8%. For the first full fiscal year after the deal closed, that’s exactly
what the acquired company contributed, and there didn’t seem to
be much upside thereafter. The board of directors was frustrated
and demanded a “look-back” into how such a debacle could happen.
The stock price, which rose on the acquisition announcement, now
floundered 15% below where it was before the deal—and this, despite
a slight upturn in the overall market.
With all this doom and gloom, the management team was disappointed,
too. The CEO demanded that someone pay a price for providing
misleading information about the upside prospects. He assured
investors they would, in those immortal words, “get to the bottom
of it” and “never make these mistakes again.”
In an almost comic irony, despite the dreadful failure of the
acquisition for the company’s owners, plus the rage from the board
of directors, management actually made money on the deal. That’s
right— their incentive plan actually rewarded the improvement in
ROIC. Never mind that they got there by investing a huge sum in a
failed acquisition or that the share price collapsed as the bad news
poured forth.
As shown in figure 3, although the deal woefully underperformed
management’s projected ROIC and meaningfully underperformed
the company’s cost of capital, the 8% ROIC on the acquisition was
higher than the 5% they had before the deal. Even with all the problems
encountered after closing the deal, it turns out that the acquisition
was less bad than what the company was already doing. As a result,
the average ROIC of the company’s investments, and thus its overall
reported ROIC, both go up.
Yet many observers would counter that the increase in the return
on invested capital was in fact “good.” In a word—no. If we get money
from our shareholders and lenders at a combined expected return of
10%, and we invest at only 8%, we have destroyed value. It’s that simple.
Current + Acquisition = Consolidated
Net Operating
Profit After Taxes 50 + 40 = 90
Invested Capital 1,000 + 500 = 1,500
Return on
Invested Capital 5% 8% 6%
Figure 3—Rate of Return Accretion
Let’s use a simple example to prove this. Imagine that the $40
million in net operating profit after tax (NOPAT) was sustainable. Many
probably don’t remember this from their school days, but the way to
determine the present value of a sustained, or constant, stream of
numbers is to divide the annual amount by the discount rate, which
for a company is its cost of capital. Thus, the present value of $40
million repeated over and over is $400 million, or $40 million divided
by the cost of capital of 10%. Note that the $40 million provides a
10% annual return on the $400 million.
OK, sorry to drag you through present value calculations, but
here’s the punch line: The company paid $500 million to acquire a
company worth $400 million. Not good—whether the acquirer had a
return on capital of 40%, 10%, or even 5% before the deal, it’s never
a good idea to invest $500 million to buy something worth only $400
million. It destroys $100 million of value, and this is why the company
faces a sagging share price. Despite all that, the management team
earned higher bonuses!
It’s true that management’s stock and option-based long-term
incentives would decline because of the softness in the share price.
But for reasons we will explore later in this book, managements
typically focus more on their annual bonus than on their long-term
incentives. So, don’t count on long-term incentives to overcome the
disincentives of short-term bonuses. It’s better to align both longand
short-term incentives by using more-thoughtful measures and
incentive structures.
True, it’s perplexing that the very essence of value creation is
the ability to invest at rates of return above the cost of capital, yet
measuring improvements in the return on capital can provide such
ineffective signals on when to invest. For those still unsold on the
fallacy of rate-of-return metrics, here’s one more way to see the
problem.
Consider what would happen if the two examples above were
business units of the same consolidated company. One business
unit is earning a 40% ROIC, and the annual incentive plan would
penalize its managers for making an investment earning a 30%
return. At the very same time, the other business unit managers
would be rewarded with higher bonuses for investing at merely
8%—and that’s madness! Why would we want to punish one group
of managers for an investment earning 30% while rewarding others
for investing at 8%?
Does this sound like an archaic technicality that occurs once in
a blue moon? I assure you that this seemingly odd quandary isn’t as
rare as you may think—it’s happening right now across corporate
America. Often, it’s hard to see. But for management teams that think
internal processes are none of their investors’ business, they should
know that curious investors, particularly activist investors, can learn
a lot from the outside.
For companies that publish segment financial information,
it’s often possible to see what’s happening with publicly available
data alone. If the company publishes revenue, profit, and assets by
segment, a crude analysis will show which segments earn higher
returns by simply dividing profits or cash flow by assets. This can then
be compared to an assessment of which segments are showing the
most revenue growth—is the company actually growing the higherreturn
businesses? Or even better, we can look at capital expenditures
as well as the change in assets each year, to see if the company is
investing a greater percentage of segment profits back into growing
the businesses that have delivered higher returns.
To illustrate this, consider United Technologies (NYSE: UTX). For
the five years ending in December 2017, the company reported four
primary operating segments: (1) Otis, (2) UTC Climate, Controls &
Security, (3) Pratt & Whitney, and (4) UTC Aerospace Systems. For
each segment, the company reports revenue, gross profit, operating
profit before tax, assets, depreciation & amortization, and capital
expenditures. They also report some items under “eliminations &
other,” as well as general corporate expenses. Investors can spend
considerable time determining if these items should be allocated to
the primary operating segments and, if so, how. For the purposes
of this example, these items have been allocated proportional to the
amount shown for each of the primary operating segments. In other
words, if a segment were 20% of the assets shown for the primary
operating segments, they would be assigned 20% of assets listed as
eliminations & other. This is not precise, but it’s a decent first step
and adequate for this illustration.
For each primary operating segment, depreciation & amortization
can be added back to operating profit to get a rough estimate
of EBITDA. This can then be divided by segment assets to get a
ballpark indication of the cash return on assets. Using this simplistic
segment cash return measure, we see in figure 4 that over the last
five years the Otis segment has averaged a 26% cash rate of return,
while Pratt & Whitney has averaged only 9%, or about one-third of
the rate of return.
RETURN REINVESTMENT
RATE
United Technologies Segment
Estimated
EBITDA/ Assets
CapEx/Estimated
EBITDA
Otis 26% 5%
UTC Climate, Controls & Security 14% 10%
Pratt & Whitney 9% 41%
UTC Aerospace Systems 8% 19%
Figure 4—United Technologies Segments
We can evaluate the amount of investment in each business by
examining capital expenditures as a percentage of the rough EBITDA
estimate. This reinvestment rate metric (admittedly a bit primitive)
has averaged 5% for Otis over the last five years, while Pratt & Whitney
averaged 41%, or about eight times the reinvestment rate. This
analysis is not precise, but no matter how we allocate the eliminations
& other items, the story will not change. UTX invests a lot more in
a lower-return business both on an absolute basis and as a proportion
of the cash generated.
This is not meant to criticize UTX. It could be that Otis has
such a high market share and that it has very few adjacent business
areas to enter, so there’s really nothing to invest in. And the Pratt &
Whitney segment may generate benefits that show up in the rates
of return in other segments. It’s easy to see, though, how such an
analysis would help an investor, or especially a manager, know what
questions to ask.
This very real example illustrates the problems with rate of return
measures. If Pratt & Whitney invested in projects expected to earn
a 15% rate of return, its average rate of return would rise. But if
Otis invested in those very same projects, its rate of return would
decline. In other words, its 26% return would be diluted by blending
in some 15% return projects. If the business unit managers were paid
to improve rates of return, it’s easy to see how the reinvestment rate
in Otis would be expected to be lower than in Pratt & Whitney, since
Otis’s current higher performance effectively sets a higher hurdle
rate for management.
Investors typically have numerous clues available to assess the
situation. For example, a review of the executive compensation section
of the annual proxy statement will describe the measures that the
compensation committee uses to reward management. Are they
being rewarded for improving returns? A review of transcripts from
earnings calls and investor presentations will offer additional clues
on what management finds important. Sometimes they will come
right out and say, “We have been searching for ways to invest in [our
highest-return business], but thus far we cannot find anything that
doesn’t dilute its high returns.” Bingo.
We need a performance measure that recognizes the importance
of rates of return without creating a disincentive to invest in and grow
our high-return businesses. The principle of economic profit first
appeared in the literature as long ago as the 1800s.5 The key performance
drivers of revenue growth, profit margins, and asset intensity
are brought together by economic profit into one tidy measure
designed to signal whether a business is generating enough profit to
overcome all costs, including the cost of capital. For those readers
who have taken economics classes, the notion of economic rent means
essentially the same thing.
For about a century or so, the notion of “economic profit” mostly
languished in academic textbooks and journal articles, with an occasional
practical application in the business world. One such early use
almost a hundred years ago was by Alfred Sloan, who gave his General
Motors executives a share of GM’s “economic profit.”6,7
Then, beginning in the 1980s, my former partners Joel Stern and
Bennett Stewart, the lead founders of Stern Stewart & Co., developed,
trademarked, and popularized a financial metric known as Economic
Value Added,8,9,10 or EVA®. It is worth noting that Institutional Shareholder
Services, the proxy and governance advisory firm that advises
investors on how to vote on public company proxy votes, acquired
Bennett Stewart’s company, EVA Dimensions, in 2018. So, companies
should expect investors to exert more pressure to adopt EVA-like
measures in the future. And, as my partner Marwaan Karame has
explained,11 it’s also important that companies customize the measure
to be suitable for their business model and accounting policies.
To calculate EVA, one would start with the net operating profit
after tax, or NOPAT, and subtract a capital charge based on the
weighted average cost of capital multiplied by the amount of capital
invested in order to produce the NOPAT. For example, consider a
business with $1,000 in revenue, $700 in operating costs, and a 40%
corporate income tax rate. There would be $300 of operating profit
before tax ($1,000 – $700), and after subtracting $120 of tax ($300 Î
40%), the resulting NOPAT would be $180. If the company deployed
$1,500 to fund facilities, production capacity, and working capital,
and if its weighted average cost of capital were 10% (isn’t it always?),
then the company would have a $150 capital charge ($1,500 Î 10%).
The EVA would then simply be the $180 of NOPAT less the capital
charge of $150, or $30.
With EVA, and its generic form of economic profit, huge advances
were made over all the measures discussed previously. For the first
time, we have a complete measure that captures growth, margin,
and investment. And, importantly, EVA measures both quality and
quantity. Eureka!
To illustrate the power of EVA, we will use the same examples
that confounded ROIC and encouraged investments at 8% while
discouraging investments at 30%. Consider the high-return business
that currently earns a 40% ROIC and is seeking to invest in a $250
million acquisition that it expects to earn a 30% ROIC. The annual
bonuses based on ROIC discouraged this, but what if bonuses were
tied to improving EVA? As shown in figure 5, EVA would encourage
this value-increasing investment.
Current + Acquisition = Consolidated
Net Operating
Profit After Taxes 400 + 75 = 475
Invested Capital 1,000 + 250 = 1,250
Return on
Invested Capital 40% 30% 38%
Capital Charge at
10% (100) + (25) = (125)
EVA 300 + 50 = 350
Figure 5—EVA Accretion
Notice that EVA rises by $50 million when this investment is
pursued. The EVA of the acquisition (the middle column) is equal
to the change in EVA; it’s readily calculated with simple math, and
much clearer than seeing how combining 30% with 40% yields a
38% ROIC. Regardless of whether the existing business earned
40%, 10%, or 5%, this new acquisition would add $50 million of
EVA. Good is good.
And the same works in reverse. The managers of the other business
earning 5% that were rewarded by their ROIC-based bonus for
making an investment earning 8%, a rate below the 10% cost of capital,
wouldn’t be so fortunate under EVA. Indeed, they would see their
annual bonuses decline whenever they invested at a rate of return
below the 10% cost of capital, the minimum threshold for success.
This can be seen in figure 6.
Current + Acquisition = Consolidated
Net Operating
Profit After Taxes 50 + 40 = 90
Invested Capital 1,000 + 500 = 1,500
Return on
Invested Capital 5% 8% 6%
Capital Charge at
10% (100) + (50) = (150)
EVA (50) + (10) = (60)
Figure 6—EVA Dilution
In this case, EVA declines by $10 million and would do so regardless
of what the acquirer’s business looked like before the acquisition—bad
is bad. So, EVA restores a sense of sanity in that good investments
increase the measure while bad investments reduce it. Remember that
value is created whenever an investment is made that earns a return
above the required return on the investment.
Sadly, EVA is not flawless. To improve the measure relative to
merely using reported figures in the calculation, Stern Stewart recommended
making various adjustments to the accounting numbers.
For example, it recommended adding back the bad debt reserve to
accounts receivable and adding the change in the bad debt reserve back
to NOPAT. Similarly, inventory valuation methods, warranty reserves,
goodwill and intangibles, the loss on foreign currency translation,
and pension expenses were all adjusted to reflect a more economic
view on performance. The firm utilized economic depreciation rather
than accounting depreciation in some cases to smooth the total cost
of owning assets (depreciation plus a capital charge) over the life of
the assets. And cash operating taxes replaced tax provisions, because
they believed the cash payment was more important to investors than
the tax provision on the accounting books.
At times, EVA became overcomplicated. I can attest that, when
I worked at Stern Stewart, we took great pains to make only the
most important adjustments to accounting for each client, so that the
measure would be more understandable. But in practice, the internal
accounting and finance staffers would often insist on a more “pure”
measure. Translation: It often became overly complicated. What
seemed like performance measurement heaven turned out to be hell
for many who were regularly confused about how to calculate and
apply it in making decisions.
The cynic in me thinks, at least in some cases, that the complexity
was deliberately added by the accounting and finance comrades to
help maintain their control and job security. Operating folks would
be confused by the complexity and would have to turn to the finance
intelligentsia to work out the numbers—what a shame. The idea was
to give people transparent measures and a clear sense of how performance
related to success. Complexity thwarted this noble goal, and
the finance politburo maintained their control.
For companies that were careful in their EVA implementation
and comprehensive in their communication and training, the potential
complexity problem could be overcome. It took me nearly a decade
to notice another much larger problem with EVA, and the better part
of another to find a solution to it. The problem: EVA discouraged
investment in growth.12 Still, there is a way to fix it.
Notes
1 This phrase has been attributed to the anthropologist Margaret Mead. Teaching
Music Through Performance in Band, vol. 3 (2000), edited by Richard B. Miles, Larry
Blocher, and Eugene Corporon, p. 13.
2 This quote has been attributed to Peter Drucker, Tom Peters, W. Edwards Deming,
and Lord Kelvin, among others.
3 Amazon doesn’t disclose R&D. Capital IQ puts the full technology and content
amount on its R&D line, so this is the treatment I have used when evaluating
the company, though I acknowledge this is imperfect.
4 “Look Beyond EBITDA,” GBQ, accessed June 22, 2019, https://gbq.com/lookbeyond-
ebitda/.
5 Alfred Marshall, Principles of Economics (London: Macmillan, 1890).
6 J. McDonald, A. P. Sloan, and C. Stevens, My Years with General Motors (New York:
Doubleday & Company, 1972).
7 Stephen F. O’Byrne, “Three Versions of Perfect Pay for Performance (or, The
Rebirth of Partnership Concepts in Executive Pay),” Journal of Applied Corporate
Finance 26, no. 1 (2014): 29–38.
8 EVA is a registered service mark of Stern Value Management, Ltd. (originally by
Stern Stewart & Co. in 1994) for financial management and consulting services
in the area of business valuation, and is registered as a trademark by Institutional
Shareholder Services Inc. (originally by EVA Dimensions LLC in 2008) for a
number of uses.
9 G. Bennett Stewart, The Quest for Value: The EVA Management Guide (New York:
HarperBusiness, 1998).
10 Joel M. Stern and John S. Shiely, The EVA Challenge: Implementing Value-added
Change in an Organization (New York: Wiley, 2004). Incidentally, I wrote the book’s
epilogue, on “EVA and the New Economy.”
11 Marwaan Karame, “Prepare for This Pay-for-Performance Measure,” CFO.com,
accessed December 4, 2018, http://fortuna-advisors.com/2018/12/04/preparefor-
this-pay-for-performance-measure/.
12 See Gregory V. Milano, “EVA and Growth,” EVAngelist, no. IV. EVAngelist is a
publication produced by Stern Stewart & Co. for its clients. I was a partner at
Stern Stewart when I wrote this article.