THERE ARE FAR better ways to motivate executives to think
and act like owners than the typical corporate incentive program.
But before getting to the details, the following will set the stage by
identifying a few common obstacles. The first is that compensation
committees, and many compensation experts as well, seem to care
more about following what others do and less about whether an
incentives package motivates the right behavior.
When we were young, many of us were asked by our parents
whether we would follow our friends if they jumped off a bridge.
Typically, this was in response to our saying, “Well, Jimmy did it!”
We all responded “no,” of course, but we were never really tested.
My wife and I were blessed with four wonderful children who are all
adults now. But as they grew up, I feared the possibility of peer pressure,
and the harm it could inflict on them. Though admittedly to a
lesser degree, I have felt similar anxiety talking to client executives and
compensation-committee members over the years. Frequently, they
justify features of their compensation design by saying, “this particular
approach is common in our industry,” even while conceding that it
really doesn’t make particular sense for their business. I always want
to ask if they would jump off a bridge if their industry counterparts
had done so. The few times I couldn’t help myself, and did ask, they
simply laughed—and we moved on. (Probably better that way.…)
To be clear, it’s not only the corporate folk. Over the years,
I have attended scores of meetings held at dozens of companies
during which compensation experts presented an extremely thorough
description of each compensation element used across the
industry, along with their recommendations for how to fit in with
the pack. But rarely did they mention how their recommendations
would motivate the desired behaviors—or even what those behaviors
are. Sadly, executive compensation processes seem to have quite a
bit in common with high schoolers: They are highly susceptible
to peer pressure and are designed to promote conformity with
the industry…“because Jimmy is doing it.” What a distraction this
whole process has become!
As discussed throughout this book, managers and, particularly, board
members often care more about how they are perceived than about
results. It sounds dreadful, but in the case of a typical board member,
this is actually quite rational, since they are disproportionally exposed
to bad outcomes in terms of reputational risk, and they usually don’t
partake significantly (monetarily) in the fruits of good outcomes. If a
company blazes a new trail with a compensation package full of seemingly
logical, but untested, features, and if the outcome proves to be
an excessively large payday for executives relative to performance, the
head of the compensation committee may be publicly criticized. Such
criticism can make it difficult for directors to renew their positions
or land new ones. And the looks they get at conferences and cocktail
parties can be borderline ruthless, too. After all, what’s the upside if
the groundbreaking compensation plan does succeed in motivating
exceptional performance? It varies by director and company, but usually
a relatively small percentage of their total personal wealth is invested
in the stock of the company. So, they typically play it safe.
The beaten path, with its lack of PR risk, can look attractive to
executives, as well. As with directors, they are less likely to attract negative
attention if they’re just following industry standards. In addition
to this pressure to conform, for any compensation plan to be implemented,
it must be endorsed and championed by the CEO, the CFO,
and the head of human resources. Ultimately, the board’s compensation
committee must approve the plan, though the process should be led
by management if it’s to motivate owner-like behaviors and reinforce
an ownership culture. Executives must understand the current adverse
incentives, embrace a path to reinforce better behavior, and adopt the
principles discussed below.
To illustrate the range of obstacles to motivating the right behavior,
let’s consider two identical companies. Company A is led by a
founder who, despite her company’s having gone public eight years
ago, still owns 25% of the outstanding shares, which makes up over
90% of her wealth. She participates in all the executive compensation
plans that her executive team participates in, but her salary and her
long- and short-term incentive opportunities are all roughly 10% below
median for comparable CEOs. She simply hasn’t made it a priority to
push for salary increases, because she would prefer that the money
be spent on her team.
The CEO of Company B has been in his position for eight years
and receives an annual salary that is at the 80th percentile relative to
the rest of the industry; due to the wide dispersion of CEO salaries in
his industry, it is 25% higher than the median. His target annual bonus
is 125% of salary, as compared to a norm of 100%, and in addition he
receives grants of restricted stock and stock options every year that
are each valued equal to his salary (to keep it simple, we won’t use
performance share units that have performance tests in this example,
though these are discussed below). One-third of the restricted stock
vests on the first, second, and third anniversaries of the date of grant;
he normally sells all the shares that aren’t needed to comply with the
company’s executive stock-ownership guidelines. The options, which
vest after one year, have a 10-year life. He has been told it doesn’t
usually make economic sense to exercise stock options early in their
life; but to diversify his personal wealth, he has usually held options
between one and two years before cashing them out. Of course, this
varies as he tries to sell more when the stock seems high, which is
tough, given the blackout periods when executives cannot transact
in the company’s stock.
On the surface, it seems that both CEOs should be motivated to
do what is best for the long-term good of their shareholders—but
in reality their motivations are quite different. What will drive the
change in their personal wealth over the next five years? Clearly, our
Company A CEO will benefit financially only if there is strong fiveyear
TSR from dividends and share-price appreciation. To accomplish
this requires improvements in her company’s results while it makes
substantial, effective investments in the future to maintain or drive
the future growth rate and, therefore, the valuation multiple.
For Company B’s CEO, however, the single-most-important determinant
of his personal wealth over the next five years is whether he
is still CEO in five years. So, he will be extremely careful to avoid any
risk exposures that may cost him his job, which is fine if it means
prudent risk aversion for the company; but unfortunately that attitude
will often lead to an overly conservative strategy and business
culture, along with less investment and less growth. That’s OK by
him, though, since his annual bonuses can still remain high as long as
the slower growth is budgeted. The second-most-important influence
on his wealth is his ability to consistently sandbag the compensation
committee with endless stories of how the sky is falling in order to
explain each year why growth and profitability are going to be extra
tough that year. He laments, “I know I said the same thing last year,
and we did well, but this year is really going to be tough because of x,
y, and z.” It doesn’t matter in most companies whether performance
improves, just that it beats the budget. So, a low budget is every bit
as valuable for management as a good performance—and it’s often
easier. Thus, this CEO sets aside any thought of setting stretch-goals
to fire up the troops and get them thinking outside the box, lest his
actions give the compensation committee the crazy idea that they
should raise the performance targets.
The third-most-important influence on Company B’s CEO
compensation is to maintain and increase his already-above-market
salary. Of course, the high salary means extra money in his pocket,
but it’s even more important that it be kept high since the target bonus
is 125% of salary, and since the restricted stock and stock options are
each granted at 100% of salary. So, each dollar of salary translates
to $4.25 of total target compensation. For many CEOs, the total
compensation multiplier is even higher. One of the important factors
in benchmarking CEO salaries is company size, whether viewed in
terms of revenue, assets, market capitalization, number of employees,
or other metrics. This causes an incentive to grow that may be
tough to accomplish when a conservative management style has
caused underinvestment. This roundabout inducement to enlarge
the business can motivate a megamerger even when the economics
are marginal. Earlier in this book, we noted that acquisitions tend to
be associated, on average, with better long-term TSR, but only when
adequate cash flow is generated over time. Acquisitions “to grow for
growth’s sake,” or really for CEO compensation’s sake, rarely end
well—except, of course, for the CEOs.
It’s unlikely that Company A’s CEO would be excessively riskaverse.
She should be expected to manage risks, but not be afraid to
pursue worthwhile investments and projects. She probably wouldn’t
obsess over her salary, though she would want it to be fair, and we
shouldn’t expect her to launch any megamergers that just make the
company bigger. The typical CEO package, alas, does a poor job of
encouraging Company B’s CEO to act like A’s.
Most complaints about executive compensation by journalists
and investors focus on how much a CEO makes, not how she or he
makes it. This tendency was articulated well in 1990 by Professors
Michael Jensen and Kevin Murphy in their Harvard Business Review
article titled “CEO Incentives: It’s Not How Much You Pay, but How.”1
There they wrote:
There are serious problems with CEO compensation, but excessive pay
is not the biggest issue. The relentless focus on how much CEOs are
paid diverts public attention from the real problem—how CEOs
are paid. In most publicly held companies, the compensation of top
executives is virtually independent of performance. On average, corporate
America pays its most important leaders like bureaucrats. Is it
any wonder then that so many CEOs act like bureaucrats rather than
the value-maximizing entrepreneurs companies need to enhance their
standing in world markets?
Thank you, Professors Jensen and Murphy—almost 30 years later,
these thoughts ring every bit as true as the day they were written.
In certain situations, executives are not paid enough for outstanding
performance; in many companies this is as big a problem as overpaying
underperformers is in other companies. Consider, for example,
Transocean, the leading offshore driller, which delivered 480% TSR
over the five years from the end of 2002 through the end of 2007. In
three of those five years its annual incentive plan for senior executives
paid nothing, and in the other two years it paid an average of target
annual incentives. But the company’s TSR was 5.9 times that of the
S&P 500, so it is clear that management was underpaid. Sure, they
made money on their long-term incentives, but why have an annual
plan if it doesn’t reward outstanding value creation? Beyond the risk
of managers’ making suboptimal decisions, companies in these situations
are likely to have a hard time recruiting and then retaining
executive talent.
The executive compensation industry is huge and replete with
many thousands of experts, pundits, and advisors. Hundreds of journals,
conferences, academic studies, and all sorts of governance experts
are at the beck and call of interested compensation committees and
managements. Somehow, though, despite all this effort, and undoubtedly
the best of intentions, executive compensation is a mess—full
of terrible compensation strategies, structures, and execution. One
telling example of good intentions gone awry is the widespread use
of relative TSR by U.S. companies.
The Relative TSR Conundrum
In the 1990s, few people had ever heard of “relative TSR,”2 but it was
up-and-coming. Over 50% of S&P 500 companies now use some form
of relative total shareholder return to determine executive compensation,
and many believe it’s a highly effective measure. To some, relative
TSR rewards success while limiting the risk that large payouts might
accumulate and attract media attention simply because of an upwarddrifting
stock market or industry. To the rest of us, relative TSR just
weakens the alignment between shareholders and executives while
amplifying compensation volatility and uncertainty.
To determine relative TSR, companies typically calculate the
percentile ranking of a company’s TSR over a period against the
TSR of a list of public companies; these can include the constituents
of a stock index, the members of an industry, or a customized set
of comparable publicly traded companies. The performance cycle,
or period for measurement, is often three years; to dampen market
volatility, share prices are often averaged over 30 to 90 days at the start
and end of the cycle. The stock with the top TSR in the comparison
group is labeled as being in the 100th percentile; the stock at the
bottom is labeled zero; and the rest are distributed in between, using
the standard percentile method.
The conceptual idea behind relative TSR is to recognize skill,
without being distracted by luck and randomness, so as to deliver
compensation that’s “fair.” The intent is to deliver more shares to an
executive team that leads a tough industry and fewer to an executive
group that trails in a high-performing industry. Energy and utility
companies first adopted relative TSR because they and their peers face
many industry-wide market influences, such as exposure to cyclical
and volatile energy prices. Nowadays, relative TSR is used across all
industries.
Management is typically granted a number of performance share
units (PSUs), which are conditional company shares. An alternative
is to grant performance share options (PSOs). The number of shares
or options that vest at the end of the cycle is determined by using
the relative TSR performance test. For example, it could be that if a
company’s relative TSR is 75th percentile or higher, the executives are
granted twice as many shares as indicated by the number of PSUs.
From the 50th percentile up to the 75th percentile, they may receive
between 100% and 200%. Between the 25th and 50th percentile, they
could get between 50% and 100% of the shares; and if they perform
at less than the 25th percentile, they forfeit their PSUs altogether.
Many alternative vesting profiles are in use, but this is the approach
used in the testing that is discussed below.
When a company delivers a top relative-TSR result, it gives its
managers a double benefit, since the relative-TSR ranking can deliver
up to twice the shares. And, of course, the share price has typically
risen, so each share is worth more. But if the only reason the stock
did well was that their market or industry itself did well, the shares
may each be worth more; however, depending on how the company’s
relative TSR ranks, it may forfeit all or some of the potential maximum
number of PSUs. In principle, this emphasis on both absolute and
relative performance seems ideal; but as we will see below, it doesn’t
work as well in practice.
Our first capital market research project on relative TSR used 2016
data for an article that we published on CFO.com; then we updated
and improved the analysis through 2017 for an article in Workspan. In
the latter project, we conducted two studies on the relative TSR of
the companies in the Russell 1000 that were public for the full period
of each study; in every case, the starting and ending share prices were
averaged over 60 days to reflect the 30- to 90-day conventions that
companies typically use. The first study also showed weak pay-forperformance
linkage.
We studied the 712 Russell 1000 companies that were public
throughout the entire period from the end of 2005 through the end
of 2017. Ten cycles were studied, with the first being from the end
of 2005 to the end of 2008, and so on through the end of 2017. Each
company’s TSR was compared with that of the whole group, and each
was assigned a percentile rank in each cycle. We ran the results for
each company for each cycle through the typical PSU-vesting logic,
described above, and then we averaged the vesting for each company
over the 10 cycles. When we compared this average of those 10 cycles
to what the vesting percentage would have been if based on cumulative
relative-TSR performance over the full period, we found a large
gap between the average rewards to management and the cumulative
returns for shareholders.
Consider the semiconductor company NVIDIA. Over the full
12-year cycle, NVIDIA’s cumulative TSR was 1,712%. This was 98th
percentile, an enormously high TSR that should have generated an
equally fantastic reward. Indeed, if it were cumulative relative TSR
over the long term that had mattered, this level of performance would
have generated the maximum 200% vesting. However, due to the
pattern of the cycle-by-cycle relative TSR, NVIDIA’s average relative-
TSR ranking was only 44th percentile. And if it had used exactly the
above-described version of the relative TSR test, its executives would
have averaged only 79% vesting. This appears rather far out of alignment
with the shareholders’ return, with management seeming to
be vastly underpaid. Across the whole sample, management teams
would have either over-vested or under-vested, on average, by 45%
of their total original number of PSUs. This is such a large average
deviation from the intended outcome that it completely dismisses
any notion that relative TSR is useful for aligning management with
owners over time.
With pay schemes based on relative TSR, then, many managers
end up feeling underpaid relative to shareholders. In other cases,
many shareholders wish they’d earned a higher TSR to reflect the
high level of executive pay. When managers feel underpaid it can
be demotivating for management; and when management appears
overpaid, it can face a public relations crisis, which in turn fosters
attention from activist investors.
Also, within each relative-TSR cycle the awards earned can vary
considerably, depending on which day the cycle ends. To demonstrate
this, we examined the relative-TSR percentile ranking for each
company during 52 three-year cycles ending as of each week in 2017.
For example, at the start of 2017, Celgene would have vested in 148%
of its PSUs. This vesting dropped to 122% for the cycle ending at the
conclusion of one month. Then over the following weeks, the vesting
percentage would have increased until it reached the cap of 200% by
mid-April, where it stayed for two months. But as the middle of the
year approached, a substantial deterioration occurred in relative TSR;
for December its relative TSR was bottom-quartile, so no PSU vesting
would have been triggered. With only a few months of movement in
the vesting date, the value of this allegedly long-term incentive would
have reached either the cap or the floor. Again, either the managers
or the owners are likely to feel shortchanged.
Although, in principle, relative TSR appears attractive, in reality
it does not align managers and owners over long periods and, within
a given cycle, the executives will vest in vastly different numbers of
shares, depending on the day the three-year cycle ends. Many executives
already discount the value of stock awards, and using relative
TSR only exacerbates this, which is not at all helpful for attracting
or retaining talent.
After our research, we began to advise clients to reduce their
reliance on relative TSR and, in pursuit of that goal, we implement
performance tests based on fundamental growth, margin, and return
metrics. The main point of this discussion of relative TSR, though, is
to illustrate how easy it is to design compensation frameworks that
seem to make logical sense but that in reality do a poor job of instilling
an appropriate ownership mentality.
The Main Compensation Goals and Tradeoffs
Our main compensation goal is to simulate ownership that encourages
managers to think and act like long-term, committed owners.
Admittedly, it’s hard to design these types of incentives.
To illustrate some of the difficulties, consider an owner of a
mom-and-pop hardware store. It has been quite profitable for years,
but then a Lowe’s big-box store opens across the street. Reality sets
in fast. Can the owner beat Lowe’s? Probably not…they have a larger
store, more variety, and lower consumer prices because they buy at
scale. If the owner can beat them, perhaps with great service, and
can continue to thrive—great. But if they realize they can’t, they
close their shop fast to preserve capital—much more quickly than a
corporate-owned branch that could spend months or years justifying
why performance is down, presenting corrective measures, and
lingering as a weak competitor that bleeds cash every darn day. It’s
OK with the corporate manager that profits are down, as long as
it’s explainable. Of course, he has the hidden motivation of protecting
his own job, and perhaps those of his subordinates. After all, he
may feel a greater allegiance to them than to a group of anonymous
shareholders. The owner of the small store, though, feels frustrated
by the turn of events but doesn’t need to justify himself to anybody
else. It’s hard, but not impossible, to design incentives that emulate
this owner-like thinking in these types of circumstances.
When designing a compensation plan, three overriding decisions
must be made: Which measures will be used? How will targets be
set? And how leveraged or sensitive will the incentive payments be if
performance is above- or below-target? Naturally, many other important
considerations will crop up that need to be taken into account,
yet these three are the ones we will now focus on.
I am, of course, partial to the Fortuna Advisors performance
measure, RCE, but any measure or combination of measures can be
used that accomplishes the following:
• Balances the desire to drive cost efficiency and capital productivity,
or, in other words, to achieve high returns on capital, while
investing in future growth
• Emphasizes long-term value creation while at the same time
motivating outstanding current performance
• Encourages P&L investments, such as R&D and marketing (if
important to the business), on a consistent basis relative to any
capital expenditures and acquisitions that appear on the balance
sheet
• Relates well to company TSR, on average, over time (for private
companies, it should relate well to TSR for public peers)
When these criteria are met by a single measure, such as RCE,
that solution is vastly preferred to asking management to balance two
measures, which would create a potentially confusing optimization
challenge. One multi-measure approach that works is to set up a grid
with growth on one axis and return or margin on the other axis. My
colleagues and I have designed such an approach for PSU tests, to
replace relative TSR, but care must be taken in defining the measures
and calibrating the performance requirements to ensure that higher
payouts generally occur when higher TSR is expected based on past
experience. When management, and especially CFOs, determine such
grids based on gut feel alone, they often overemphasize margins and
returns while underemphasizing growth and investment.
The table in figure 66 comes from the Varian Medical Systems proxy
issued in 2018.3 It illustrates the vesting of performance share units,
depending on revenue growth and margin improvement. As it clearly
states in the proxy, “the targets for Three-Year Revenue Compound
Annual Growth Rate and Three-Year Change in EBIT as a Percentage
of Revenue in the payout matrix were set based on the median results
of our Business Model Peers.” By calibrating the table against what
delivered strong TSR for the company and its business model peers in
the past, the company has confidence that if management achieves a
high PSU vesting, it will have delivered the type of performance that
usually leads to strong TSR. The linkage to value creation is undoubtedly
clearer to management than it would be with relative TSR, and at the
same time the company would avoid stock market volatility problems.
≥0.0% 3.5% 7.0% 10.5% 14.0+%
4.0% 100% 133% 167% 200% 200%
2.0% 67% 100% 133% 167% 200%
0.0% 33% 67% 100% 133% 167%
-2.0% 0% 33% 67% 100% 133%
≥-4.0% 0% 0% 33% 67% 100%
Three-Year ΔEBIT Margin
Three-Year Sales Growth CAGR
Figure 66—Performance Test for Varian Medical Systems
Performance Share Units
Note that the table is not based on budgeted EBIT margin or
some absolute level, but rather on improvement over the three years.
This feature dramatically improves the relationship to TSR. A similar
table can be used to calibrate annual bonuses, as well.
As discussed extensively in chapter 6 and throughout the book,
targets should always be defined as an improvement over the prior
year, rather than based on budgets or plans. Due to the way RCE
is defined, for about half the companies out there, investors have
priced the company’s stock at or below the level that reflects future
flat RCE. For these companies, and even for those where the market
has priced in modest RCE improvement, it is sufficient to simply set
the target RCE at the actual RCE achieved the prior year. Compensation
committee members often seem surprised that we recommend
a target improvement of zero—but that’s because they haven’t yet
fully internalized what RCE actually is.
National Oilwell Varco, often referred to as NOV, is a large oilfield
services and equipment company. The customized version of RCE
that it implemented is known as NOV Value Added, or NVA. As
it states in the company’s proxy statement issued in 2018, “Achieving
NVA results flat to the year prior’s actual performance requires
management to earn the cost of capital on new investments and to
sustain the performance of existing activities.”4 Some companies
are so successful and their share prices so high that investors already
have “baked in” the present value of significant future RCE improvements.
If, however, a company’s stock has been up and down, and if
this premium valuation is likely to be temporary, it is generally best
to revert to measuring performance against the prior year’s RCE. If
this premium valuation has been persistent for three to five years, it
would not be fair to shareholders to provide management with full
target incentive payouts merely for reaching the prior year’s actual
RCE. Instead, the plan should have a preset Expected Improvement
in RCE that is either a fixed number or a fixed percentage of Gross
Operating Assets at the start of the year.
To ensure that managers know the deal as thoroughly as owners
do, it’s best to establish the approach to target-setting and then set
it in stone for multiple years. Therefore, for companies requiring an
Expected Improvement in RCE, it is best to evaluate the amount of
RCE baked in the share price on an annual or quarterly basis over the
prior three to five years, and then commit to use the average as the
target for the next three to five years.
After we define the measure and establish the framework for target
setting, we then need to determine how leveraged or sensitive the plan
will be when performance goes above or below the targeted performance.
A long time ago in a faraway land—well, actually in New York
City—my good friend Steve O’Byrne taught me that there are three
primary objectives in designing and calibrating incentives and, unfortunately,
you can’t optimize them all simultaneously. But before going
down that path, it’s important to know that Steve is one of the very
few compensation experts, out of the scores I have met, who truly
understands the importance of simulating ownership in incentives.
Among Steve’s many innovations is what he calls wealth leverage,5
which in simple terms reveals how linked the executive’s personal wealth
is to changes in the wealth, or market value, of the company. If, when
the share price rises 1%, the executive’s wealth also rises 1%, wealth
leverage is considered 100%. This would pretty much be the case for the
CEO of Company A above, since her company ownership constitutes
nearly all her personal wealth. But in the case of Company B, a considerable
portion of its CEO’s income is driven by salary, payouts set as a
multiple of salary, plus annual incentives that reward sandbagging as
much as performance. And that CEO can sell any shares he wishes to,
so as to diversify his investments. His wealth leverage would be decidedly
less than 100%, so he has far less motivation to drive the company
value higher. Steve O’Byrne has developed an uncanny ability to use
information published in financial statements and in corporate proxies
to rank executives based on their wealth leverage to show who is willing
to truly expose their pay to performance—and who, by contrast,
is just trying to hedge and secure more compensation regardless of
performance. He has also demonstrated that companies with higher
wealth leverage tend to deliver higher TSR, which is consistent with
the notion that incentives are truly an investment that can generate a
return if designed and calibrated correctly.
Steve has used his wealth leverage approach to determine what
an executive should have been paid, given his or her performance; by
comparing these figures to actual total compensation, he identifies what
he calls “excess pay.”6 In other words, Steve’s approach doesn’t only
examine whether pay was “high” or “low”; he goes further, to identify
what should have been paid as the benchmark, given the company’s
performance and also the compensation package’s wealth leverage.
If a management team has low-wealth leverage, which protects their
pay when performance declines, and yet their pay skyrockets when
performance turns up, Steve would fairly describe that as “excess
pay.” The guy is a true innovator whose methodology is much better
than simply branding anyone making a lot of money as a “fat cat”
and then walking away.
For me, though, the best lesson from Steve was the first he taught
me about 25 years ago, which follows. The three main goals of executive
compensation are: (1) to attract and retain executive talent, (2)
to motivate executives to create more value, and (3) to do so at a
reasonable total cost. You simply cannot optimize these three goals
simultaneously; tradeoffs are needed.
To illustrate the tradeoffs, consider figure 67. Let’s imagine that
a company initially sets its pay-for-performance curve for its annual
incentive plan at line A.
Incentive Pay
Performance
Target
Target
C B A
Zero Payout
More Bonus
Sensitivity
Less Bonus Sensitivity
Figure 67—Tradeoffs between Motivation, Retention, and Cost
If target performance is achieved, executives receive a target annual
incentive payment. If they perform higher than target performance,
then they receive a higher annual incentive payment until perforFOURTEEN:
DESIGNING OWNER-LIKE COMPENSATION PLANS 301
mance increases enough to reach the cap. If performance is below
target, so is pay until it reaches zero. Some executives ask to remove
the cap, but the quid pro quo is to remove the floor, and as a general
rule they don’t want to write checks to the company if performance
declines too much.
To help client executives understand these implications, I believe
it’s always important to prepare simulations of payouts based both on
management’s projections and on historical performance trends for
their company and their peers. Sometimes this review leads management
to believe there is not enough of a payout when performance is
strong, so they say motivation will be weak and therefore they must
seek to increase the incentive leverage. That is, they want each increment
of performance improvement to lead to a greater pay increase.
To add leverage, we can rotate the pay-for-performance curve
around the point where target performance provides target pay until
we land on line B, which is steeper. This new incentive will be more
motivating since the incremental payouts rise and fall faster; and
management will be hungrier to improve performance since they
get a bigger share themselves. Other levels of performance would
have had a payout on line A, but would deliver zero payout on line B.
This creates a higher probability of zero payout, which can make it
harder to attract and retain executive talent.
This too we can fix by sliding line B to the left until it aligns with
line C, which has the same slope as B (that is, it is equally steep) but
also has the same potential for zero payout as A. This new plan is
very good at motivating, attracting, and retaining executives, yet
it does so at a much higher average cost. The three main goals of
motivation, attraction/retention, and cost cannot be simultaneously
optimized—again, tradeoffs are required to design an optimal plan
for any given company.
The financial performance of certain companies, in some industries,
is more volatile or cyclical. So, as a general rule such companies
should flatten their pay-for-performance curves so that their larger
swings in performance are dampened, resulting in similar pay volatility.
In figure 67, this would be line A.
Another important factor that affects the bonus sensitivity tradeoff
is company culture. A corporation’s culture consists of a great many
important elements, but the aspect that’s important here is how
aggressive or conservative that culture is. When executives are encouraged
to reach for the stars, take more risks, and drive success, without
feeling afraid of manageable failures, a somewhat steeper incentive
curve is in order. In such a culture, it’s fine that pay jumps up or down
and is more differentiated across various business units, since this
reinforces the culture. But in more conservatively managed companies,
a flatter curve may be better. Again, the best way to test this is
through simulations of forecasted and historical performance using
the track record of the company and its peers.
Compensation Package Design
Before we design a compensation package, we should establish our
compensation goals and some key criteria. How aggressive do we
want to be in motivating success? In other words, how much leverage
do we want? What is the time horizon for decision-making? This will
dictate the nature of, and balance across, a number of elements of
the compensation package, some of which would necessarily reinforce
longer- or shorter-term thinking. As we roll incentives down to
business-unit management, how much do we want to emphasize local
accountability and success versus motivating teamwork and sharing
best practices? These and other considerations must be discussed before
designing a compensation plan so that there is a frame of reference.
As there is no truly typical situation for setting compensation,
there is no one-size-fits-all solution. The main elements I will discuss
are the split of salary, target bonus, and long-term incentive, followed
by strategies and alternatives for each of the three main elements of
a compensation package.
When it comes to salary, that’s one of those peculiar situations
in life when less is more. If we are trying to motivate owner-like
behavior, why would we want the big, dead anchor of a high fixed
salary in the mix? The reason many executives are given high salaries
is not that they need some minimum income, at least not CEOs. It’s
that everything else in compensation is granted as a percentage or
multiple of salary. So, let’s stop that right away and separate the two.
For now, let’s consider cash compensation only. Since salary
requires solely that the executive keep the job, it is of lower risk
than other variable elements of compensation. Annual incentives, for
example, vary year to year and therefore carry more risk. Sure, they
may be higher, but they could be lower, too. In finance, we discount
cash flows for risk, and we can do the same with compensation. If
a dollar of salary is worth one dollar, then a dollar of target annual
incentive plan payment, which can end up being worth more or less,
must be worth less than one dollar. This follows the basic principle
that stable cash flows are worth more than variable cash flows, so for
variable cash flows to have the same value, they must be targeted at
a higher level.
One of the great things consulting firms do well regarding executive
compensation is gather, sort, and apply data. Let’s say that in a
given industry the median CEO salary is $500,000 and the median
target bonus is 100% of this, or another $500,000. Let’s further assume
that the bonus can rise to 200% or drop to zero, based on performance.
So, in a great year the bonus will be two times $500,000, or $1,000,000,
and total cash compensation will be $1,500,000. Sounds great, but of
course the pendulum can swing both ways and the bonus can be zero.
We all like to think people are perfectly rational, but they’re not
(of course). In 1979, the psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos
Tversky created their famous “prospect theory” that asserts that
decision-making is typically based on the potential value of losses
and gains rather than the final expected outcome, and finds that
people evaluate these results using heuristics (a fancy word for the
decision-making rules). When people are offered a choice formulated
in one way, they may be risk-averse, but when offered the same choice
formulated differently, they may display risk-seeking behavior. For
example, as Kahneman says, people may drive across town to save
$5 on a $15 calculator but not to save $5 on a $125 coat.
One very important result of the work of Kahneman and Tversky
is demonstrating that people’s attitudes toward risks concerning gains
may be quite different from their attitudes toward risks when losses
are involved. For example, when given a choice between receiving
$1,000 with certainty versus having a 50% chance of $2,500, many
may well choose the certain $1,000 in preference to the uncertain
chance of getting $2,500, even though the mathematical expectation
of the uncertain option is $1,250. This is a perfectly reasonable attitude
that is described as risk aversion. But Kahneman and Tversky found
that the same people, when confronted with a certain loss of $1,000
versus a 50% chance of no loss or a $2,500 loss, often do choose the
risky alternative. This is called risk-seeking behavior. This behavior
is not necessarily irrational, though it is important for compensation
designers to recognize the asymmetry of human preferences.
So, if we evaluate the value of the target bonus, we might say $1
of target bonus is worth only $0.80 of salary, though of course this
would vary based on the characteristics of each incentive plan. The
$0.80 is where managers would be indifferent. In other words, the variable
(risky) target bonus of $500,000 is really viewed by the executive
as being worth the same as about $400,000 of stable (low-risk) salary.
If we set each component of total expected cash compensation at the
benchmarked industry medians for salary and target bonus, this point
is somewhat academic. It is what it is….
But if we want to consider changing the mix, it’s a critical point. If
we take away some salary and offer a higher target bonus, we need to
replace each $1 of salary reduction with $1.25 of target bonus, if the
relationship in the prior paragraph holds (remember that in different
situations this $1.25 will be higher or lower). If we don’t follow this
and treat $1 of target bonus as the same as $1 of salary, given a shift
to less salary and more bonus to improve the alignment of executives
with owners, the executives may view the change in package as a pay
cut. Oh, sure, in a great year the new package will pay more, but there
is an equal and opposite downside exposure, and managers would
rightfully want something to make up for the extra risk.
Keeping the 1.25:1 ratio, the three packages would be valued
similarly by the executive, as detailed in figure 68.
Of course, executives would like to experience both the conservative
downside and the aggressive upside, but to provide the appropriate
risk-reward relationship we should always strive for symmetry
whether the plan is conservative, market median, or aggressive. The
question of which one is best comes down to the culture and strategic
objectives of the organization.
If a company sticks to its culture, what its management finds is
that it has many “good employees” who may not actually fit with
the culture. For example, a company may decide to be conservative
in business strategy, organizational culture, and compensation
strategy. To do this, it will be extra careful about risk-taking, which
means management will turn down some investments that others
may accept, because the value creation is not adequate for them to
feel comfortable taking on the risk.
Conservative Market Median Aggressive
Salary $600,000 $500,000 $400,000
Target Bonus $375,000 $500,000 $625,000
Target Total Compensation $975,000 $1,000,000 $1,025,000
The following shows what happens, in both good and bad times, to these different
mixes of salary and target annual incentives:
Conservative Market Median Aggressive
Good Times (Upside Scenario)
Salary $600,000 $500,000 $400,000
Max. Bonus (2x) $750,000 $1,000,000 $1,250,000
Max. Total Compensation $1,350,000 $1,500,000 $1,650,000
Bad Times (Downside Scenario)
Salary $600,000 $500,000 $400,000
Min. Bonus (0x) $0 $0 $0
Min. Total Compensation $600,000 $500,000 $400,000
Figure 68—Compensation Mix and Payout Variation
From a cultural perspective, a premium will be placed on being
careful in a risk-averse company when developing plans and approving
decisions. Such a company would be more likely to hedge its
bets than to take on a “Big Hairy Audacious Goal,” or BHAG, a term
that James Collins and Jerry Porras coined in their 1994 book, Built to
Last: Successful Habits of Visionary Companies.7 A BHAG encourages
companies to define visionary goals that are strategic and emotionally
compelling. These goals may encourage reaching for the stars, but they
can also involve betting the company on the outcome. A conservative
culture would shun such ideas and prefer instead to pursue a series
of smaller, more-predictable, and less-risky goals.
This conservative company would be best served by an incentive
plan that reinforces the low-risk culture by emphasizing salary and
less-leveraged incentive components. That is, it would take larger
swings in performance to achieve high or low payouts.
Such a company would likely have many employees, perhaps even
some with solid skills and strong motivation, who would feel frustrated
by the conservative strategy, culture, and compensation package.
They would buck the culture, try to change it, and seek to instill an
entrepreneurial spirit—but would be constantly met with resistance
and outright objections. Some executives might recognize their skills
and fear losing such employees, but they usually wouldn’t realize that
trying to retain them would be unlikely to succeed in the longer term
and that doing so would likely weaken the company culture.
The same is true, in reverse, for a company with an aggressive
business strategy, culture, and compensation package. It will have
skilled and effective employees who, by nature or circumstance, feel
uncomfortable in the environment and seem unhappy with the volatility
of their pay. For them, the idea of launching a new BHAG that
could prove highly lucrative but risk years of bonus pay may not be
tolerable.
Unfortunately, there is no perfect answer to how aggressive or
conservative a company’s strategy should be, but the culture and
compensation package should be aligned. If it has employees who don’t
fit the culture and seek to resign or, worse, threaten to quit unless
demands are met, it’s better to let them leave. Even if they are
skilled, it’s advisable not to dilute the desired strategy and culture
by keeping them.
Better Annual Incentives
Once a company has established its business strategy, desired culture,
and compensation strategy, the next question is how to design an
annual incentive plan that reinforces an ownership culture. In reality,
well-designed long-term incentives will do more to cement the
partnership between executives and shareholders, though an annual
plan to reinforce the ownership culture is also valuable.
An annual incentive plan requires four elements. We would need
to define the measures, the methodology for setting targets, the sensitivity
if the performance is above- or below-target, and the system of
caps and floors that limits payouts in extreme circumstances. Although
we would need considerable expertise to customize an appropriate
performance measure and then to calibrate the targets and sensitivities,
the principles required are straightforward.
As discussed throughout this book, the most reliable measure to
link to compensation is RCE, which should always be tailored to the
business dynamics and accounting conventions of both the company
and its industry. More than any other measure, RCE rises when “good”
things happen and declines when “bad” things happen; using RCE
improves the incentive to invest in the future and eliminates the incentive
to milk old assets long after they should have been replaced.
Most companies are priced to maintain their current RCE with
small increments of improvement or decline, as mentioned earlier.
For these companies, the best target-setting mechanism is to establish
the target RCE each year equal to the actual RCE performance in the
prior year. This improves on more commonly used methods in three
ways. First, it breaks the cycle of setting targets off a budget or plan,
which encourages sandbagging and underperformance. Second, it
removes the potential for year-end gaming of the system, such as
offering discounts to pull January sales into December, temporarily
driving down accounts receivable, and having other cascading
effects. Third, and most important, it encourages managers to treat
the capital as if it were their own. If they invest capital that doesn’t
cover the required return, and then the RCE declines, they are paid
less, and vice versa, of course.
As discussed above, we should set targets with a built-in expected
improvement for companies that already have an expectation of higher
RCE in the future baked into their stock price. But unfortunately, it is
hard to do the reverse for companies that are valued low enough that
investors have baked in an expectation that the current level of RCE
is not sustainable. In principle, the target RCE each year should be set
at the prior-year RCE less an expected decline. In practice, however,
prevailing compensation and investor-relations practices are such that
setting targets as a systematic decline from actuals each year is hard
for compensation committees to agree to. In these cases, targets are
generally set equal to the prior-year actual, and management must
accept this if they want to accrue the behavioral benefits that come
along with the rest of the compensation improvements. With any luck,
success will affect expectations and investors will drive share prices
higher, to reflect new expectations of more-sustained or even improving
performance after a few years; and management will then benefit
through their long-term incentives that are tied to the share price.
Though there is some room for making the pay-for-performance
curve a bit steeper or flatter, the range of acceptable bonus sensitivities
should be based on the volatility of RCE. Some businesses are
highly volatile or cyclical, and their median year-to-year change in
RCE can be 3%, 4%, or even 6%–8% of gross operating assets. In
other more-stable businesses, these variations are generally 1% or
less. This is illustrated in figure 69.
Figure 69—Stable vs. Volatile RCE
If we used the same bonus sensitivity for the two businesses
whose RCE is shown in the figure, the bonuses for the volatile business
would be bouncing between the bonus cap and floor, while the
stable business would get almost the same bonus each year, as shown
in figure 70.
Using the same bonus sensitivity for both businesses also leads
to extremes for the volatile business. The stable business has the
opposite problem. Note that both businesses earn payouts that average
above 1x because both businesses create value and improve RCE
over time. By varying the bonus sensitivity based on historical and
expected RCE volatility, we can provide similar compensation volatility
in both businesses. Consider the two incentive-payout relationships
shown in figure 71.
By flattening the pay-for-performance curve for the volatile business,
we make the bonus sensitivity more suitable for that business.
Again, management has some flexibility if it wishes to be more conservative
or aggressive, but if you were in their shoes you wouldn’t want
to move one curve toward the other too much. Note that, when we
change the slope, we solve the volatility problem; another benefit is that
we wind up rewarding the stable business managers who have achieved
cumulative improvement with a bit higher average payout, because
the underlying upward trend is being rewarded against a steeper
curve. This makes sense, because generating cumulative long-term
improvements in a very stable business is harder but more valuable.
Bonus Multiple
Figure 70—Stable vs. Volatile Bonus Multiple
0.00x
0.50x
1.00x
1.50x
2.00x
Bonus Multiple RCE
Stable Volatile
Figure 71—Pay for Performance Bonus Sensitivity
Annual incentive plans generally have caps and floors, as do
many features of long-term incentive plans. Some years ago, I realized
that companies need to modify the target-setting formula in
years after performance surpasses a cap or a floor. In order to avoid
discouraging improvement after the cap is reached, and to discourage
our writing off the kitchen sink after the floor is reached, we
set the target for the following year at the point where the floor
or cap was reached. This allows the company to limit the payout
in any given year while ensuring that the cumulative payout over
time directly relates to cumulative RCE improvement. So, the cap
isn’t really a cap per se on what can be earned over time; it’s more a
cap on what can be paid in any given year. The excess performance
above the cap (or below the floor) is rolled into the next year, in
the form of a target RCE that is below (or above) the prior year’s
actual result.
It’s fundamental to everything covered in this entire book that
readers clearly understand the beneficial, owner-like behaviors motivated
by this annual incentive plan. To illustrate how this simple and
highly effective compensation model works, consider the baseline
case shown in figure 72.
Baseline Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total
A RCE $100.0 $105.0 $110.0 $115.0 $120.0 $125.0
B ΔRCE $5.0 $5.0 $5.0 $5.0 $5.0 $25.0
C Bonus Sensitivity $20.0 $20.0 $20.0 $20.0 $20.0
D=B/C Performance Multiple 0.25x 0.25x 0.25x 0.25x 0.25x
E Target Multiple 1.00x 1.00x 1.00x 1.00x 1.00x
F=D+E Overall Incentive Multiple 1.25x 1.25x 1.25x 1.25x 1.25x
Target Annual Incentive $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000
Annual Incentive Payout $125,000 $125,000 $125,000 $125,000 $125,000 $625,000
Figure 72—Baseline RCE Incentive Simulation
Rows A and B show that this baseline business forecasts strong
RCE, at $100 million, and improving by $5 million per year. Row C
shows that the bonus sensitivity is $20 million, which is the amount
RCE would need to increase in a year to double the bonus, or to
decline in a year to zero it out. In this case, since RCE improves by
$5 million, the performance multiple is 0.25x, or simply 5 divided
by 20. This is added to the target multiple of 1.0x, which is earned
when the change in RCE is zero, to determine the overall incentive
multiple of 1.25x. The executive’s target incentive payout of
$100,000 is multiplied by the 1.25x multiple, and the actual payout
is determined to be $125,000.
Basically, if RCE rises you are paid more, and if it declines you get
less. That’s it—there’s no negotiation of budgets and targets. So, stop
spending time and effort on anything that doesn’t help improve the
business over time! As this forecast is based on smoothly improving
RCE, the payouts are the same each year. Yet, as we will see, generally
this is not the case.
What if a one-off bad performance happens one year? Maybe
it’s a temporary labor strike or a raw material shortage that leads
to elevated costs and choked production. But perhaps, after it
happens, performance is expected to normalize the following
year. In most bonus plans, executives get “whacked,” which is a
technical compensation term. Their bonus suffers in the year of
the one-off hit, and often the budgeted target is raised for the
following year when the one-off problem is expected to be resolved.
But the bonus is lost forever. In the recommended incentive plan,
RCE declines so the payout also declines in the year of the oneoff;
but as long as it really is one-off and if performance recovers
the following year, RCE improves and the money is earned back.
The executive loses only the time value of (the) money. This is
demonstrated in figure 73.
One-Off Decl ine Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total
A RCE $100.0 $90.0 $110.0 $115.0 $120.0 $125.0
B ΔRCE -$10.0 $20.0 $5.0 $5.0 $5.0 $25.0
C Bonus Sensitivity $20.0 $20.0 $20.0 $20.0 $20.0
D=B/C Performance Multiple -0.50x 1.00x 0.25x 0.25x 0.25x
E Target Multiple 1.00x 1.00x 1.00x 1.00x 1.00x
F=D+E Overall Incentive Multiple 0.50x 2.00x 1.25x 1.25x 1.25x
Target Annual Incentive $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000
Annual Incentive Payout $50,000 $200,000 $125,000 $125,000 $125,000 $625,000
Incremental Payout -$75,000 $75,000 $0 $0 $0
Figure 73—RCE Incentive Simulation with One-Off Bad Year
The difference in performance from the baseline case is caused
by a raw material shortage in year one that causes RCE to decline by
$10 million instead of rising by $5 million (as in the baseline case).
The overall incentive multiple declines to 0.50x and the payout is
only $50,000, which is $75,000 less than in year one of the baseline
simulation. By the end of the year, luckily the industry recovers from
the raw material shortage, and the RCE in year two is the very same
$110 million as in the baseline case. The one-off problem in year one
does not recur, and performance is back on track by year two. Just
as the ΔRCE in year one was $15 million below the baseline case,
the ΔRCE in year two is $15 million above baseline, so the $75,000
forfeited in year one is earned back dollar-for-dollar in year two (again,
less the time value of money). Once managers understand this, they
behave differently! Sure, they still try to mitigate the impact of the
raw material shortage in year one, because they would prefer to earn,
say, $55,000 or $60,000 instead of just $50,000. But they will spend
far less time worrying about these temporary setbacks so they can
devote more time to overcoming persistent strategic obstacles, like
reacting to a revolutionary product that a competitor is developing.
To belabor the point, they act more like owners.
Permanent Decl ine Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total
A RCE $100.0 $90.0 $95.0 $100.0 $105.0 $110.0
B ΔRCE -$10.0 $5.0 $5.0 $5.0 $5.0 $10.0
C Bonus Sensitivity $20.0 $20.0 $20.0 $20.0 $20.0
D=B/C Performance Multiple -0.50x 0.25x 0.25x 0.25x 0.25x
E Target Multiple 1.00x 1.00x 1.00x 1.00x 1.00x
F=D+E Overall Incentive Multiple 0.50x 1.25x 1.25x 1.25x 1.25x
Target Annual Incentive $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000
Annual Incentive Payout $50,000 $125,000 $125,000 $125,000 $125,000 $550,000
Incremental Payout -$75,000 $0 $0 $0 $0
Figure 74—RCE Incentive Simulation with Permanent Decline
Now, let’s consider figure 74. Perhaps in this case a new product
was launched by a competitor that immediately steals some of
our market share, which then stabilizes at a lower level. Like the
one-off example, RCE declines to $90 million in year one, yet this
time no full recovery occurs the next year. Instead, RCE rises at the
same $5 million per year as the baseline case, but from this new,
lower level. The lost annual incentive payout of $75,000 in year one
is never recovered, because all the years that follow have the same
payout as the baseline. The accountability for this more-permanent
performance decline is immediate and absolute, but, happily, the
incentive system immediately resets at this new level, providing an
opportunity to start earning above-target bonuses again as soon as
RCE improves from the new base. It’s almost like giving managers
one-year exposure to stock and stock options, where the RCE is
the stock price.
Although it’s a little complex, an interesting and constructive relationship
can be noted between the impact of the one-off decline and
the permanent decline on both shareholder wealth and the executive’s
incentive. First, let’s consider the investors: In the one-off case they
lose $15 million of RCE, which has a present value of $15 million. If
we simply assume that their required return is 10% in the permanent
decline case, then the permanent decline of $15 million causes a netpresent-
value loss of $150 million, or $15 million divided by 10% (the
present value formula for a perpetuity). So, the permanent decline
is worth 10 times as much to the investor. The executive has to wait
a year to get the $75,000 that is forfeited in year one of the one-off
case. Like investors, executives place a premium on certain money
now versus potential money later. Who knows if performance will
really improve with certainty? Since the manager’s annual incentive is
exposed to risks similar to those of the shareholders, let’s assume the
manager’s personal discount rate is also 10%. So, the cost of waiting
a year for the $75,000 is simply 10% multiplied by $75,000, or $7,500
in lost time value of money. The executive’s loss in the permanent
decline case is $75,000. Notice that the ratio of $15 million to $150
million for the investor is the same ratio as the $7,500 to $75,000 for
the executive, so that the relative importance of one-off and permanent
RCE changes is perfectly aligned.
Indeed, this is perhaps more important for the upside, since executives
earn 10 times as much for sustainable improvements as they
do for one-off improvements; achieving the former has a significant
impact on both strategy and execution priorities. Sustainable improvements
are therefore much more valuable to both the investor and the
executive who is motivated to improve RCE.
Perhaps the most powerful attribute of the RCE incentive plan is
what happens to annual incentives if management makes an investment
that causes a short-term decline in RCE but is expected to drive
significant RCE over time. Just like an owner, the manager is exposed
to the cost and the benefit, and can decide if the size of the benefit
and the confidence or likelihood that it will occur is enough to justify
the risk. Consider figure 75, which shows the baseline case modified
by management’s pursuit of an investment that takes time to pay off.
Baseline + Investment Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total
A RCE $100.0 $90.0 $107.0 $122.0 $135.0 $145.0
B ΔRCE -$10.0 $17.0 $15.0 $13.0 $10.0 $45.0
C Bonus Sensitivity $20.0 $20.0 $20.0 $20.0 $20.0
D=B/C Performance Multiple -0.50x 0.85x 0.75x 0.65x 0.50x
E Target Multiple 1.00x 1.00x 1.00x 1.00x 1.00x
F=D+E Overall Incentive Multiple 0.50x 1.85x 1.75x 1.65x 1.50x
Target Annual Incentive $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000
Annual Incentive Payout $50,000 $185,000 $175,000 $165,000 $150,000 $725,000
Incremental payout with Investm-$e7n5t,000 $60,000 $50,000 $40,000 $25,000
IRR 55%
Figure 75—RCE Incentive Simulation with Good Investment
Perhaps the new investment is the launch of a new brand extension
into an adjacent product. The project kicks off in year one with some
capital investment to build the capacity, followed by heavy marketing
to position the new product with consumers. Sales begin in the
second half of year one but only become significant in year two, so
year one is an investment year with RCE declining by $15 million.
Management nevertheless expects sales to pick up in year two and
to continue growing at a declining rate in years three through five.
By year five, RCE is fully $20 million higher than the base case. The
executive takes a hit to the annual incentive of $75,000 in year one
but earns an extra $175,000 over the next four years.
Is this enough to motivate the investment? The cash flows to the
executive represent an annualized internal rate of return of 55%,
which is significantly higher than the executive’s 10% required return
established above. Another important element of the decision must be
noted, and it’s one of the most important behavioral aspects of this
entire incentive program: How confident is the executive that the forecast
is achievable? Do they fear the capital and marketing investments may
actually be higher? Are they convinced of the sales forecasts? Is pricing
reasonable? Cost estimates? Will there be any cannibalization of sales
on existing products and, if so, what will that cost them? Have they
adequately considered their competitors’ reactions? After the executive
considers all this and more, the ultimate question is whether the
executive is willing to risk $75,000 of his or her own money, in the form
of forgone incentive in year one, in exchange for the $175,000 later.
This presents a nearly perfect simulation of ownership. Investment
proposals in such a corporate environment are no longer mere
marketing documents aimed at convincing executives or directors that
an investment is worthwhile. Before trying to convince anyone else of
the value of the investment, executives must consider for themselves
whether that is a good investment. Who says an annual incentive can’t
motivate short- and long-term thinking at the same time?
We could run many more simulations that prove the value of these
incentive designs, and their consistency and reliability, when facing the
various cultures and industries in which companies partake. But these
scenarios as presented demonstrate how the RCE incentive approach
can reinforce the ownership culture discussed throughout this book.
Better Long-Term Incentives
My former partner Bennett Stewart advocated a stock-option approach
in which options would be somewhat in the money when granted,
though the exercise price would rise over time.8 His intention was
to simulate a leveraged management buyout without putting the
company at risk. It’s as if the management would be buying shares,
where the exercise price represents debt and where the difference
between the exercise price and the stock price at the time of grant
would represent the equity owned by management. The rising exercise
price was intended to simulate interest on the debt, so management
would only make money when the stock price rose faster than the
exercise price. It was a superb idea, but unfortunately it was fraught
with tax and accounting problems. Alas, the accountants, tax practitioners,
and regulatory professionals of the world simply weren’t
ready for Bennett’s innovative solution.
Long-term executive compensation practices have become more and
more complex over the years. Where restricted stock and stock options
were once the predominant tools, we now have stock-appreciation
rights, performance cash, deferred stock units, performance share units,
performance options…and countless other alternatives and features.
What’s more, the quest for better and more effective mousetraps has led
to incentive methods that often do a worse job of motivating management
to think and act like long-term owners.
Perhaps, along the lines of Bennett’s thinking, today’s compensation
committees should look to how private equity motivates executives.
Management wins if private equity investors win and vice
versa. Managements typically earn a “promote,” which is an equity
participation that increases depending on how high the IRR is for the
investors. They tend not to worry as much about whether the success
was skill or luck; they simply reward success. And perhaps that helps
them achieve more success.
Often investors get a minimum return before management actually
participates. This can be anywhere from 5% to 10% and is often
described as an internal rate of return, or IRR. Note that, in this situation,
IRR and TSR are indistinguishable. Any value created above
this is shared between management and investors, according to a
chosen formula. For example, management may get 15%, 20%, or
25% of any value created above the minimum IRR. Generally, the
larger the company, the smaller the share that goes to management,
because executive human capital is essentially smaller in relation to
the financial capital; there are, of course, additional possible drivers
of the percentage, such as the experience and negotiating power of
the executive team.
Often another, higher IRR threshold looms, above which management
will receive an even higher percentage of the value created.
This is designed to step up the motivation after substantial success is
already achieved, since improvement opportunities become scarcer
as more and more are realized. Though the specifics vary, it is usually
the case that the more money investors make, the more management
earns, which forges a strong alignment of interests.
Public company compensation committees could reach outside
their normal comfort zone and implement long-term compensation
structures that work more like those in private equity. This could
directly copy the private equity arrangements or could be a simplified
stock and stock-option structure designed to accomplish similar
objectives.
To emulate the typical private equity deal, a company could
establish a subsidiary for the purpose of holding treasury stock that
management can earn going forward. The subsidiary could be financed
with, say, 10% in equity from management, via either paid-in capital
or a time-vested grant. The remainder could be financed with debt or
preferred stock along with a pay-in-kind feature, so that the amount
of financing builds every month to a minimum threshold before
management participates.
The value of management’s stake would increase if the value of
the company grows faster than the pay-in-kind financing. This would
replace the typical annual equity grants over, say, five years with a
single front-loaded opportunity, requiring the size of the equity pool
to be calibrated so as to deliver an appropriate midpoint payoff relative
to standard practice. Admittedly, though more feasible than Bennett
Stewart’s rising exercise price options, implementing this subsidiary
structure is also fraught with all sorts of legal, accounting, and tax
complications; ultimately, it may prove too complicated or tendentious
for investors and proxy advisory firms.
However, a simplified stock-option structure can be used to mimic
the private equity approach in a manner that is more consistent with
normal public company practices. In place of the next five years of
LTIP (Long-Term Incentive Plan) grants, management could instead
be granted one front-loaded package of stock options that would come
in five tranches, each with different vesting dates and exercise prices.
The first tranche could vest in one year and have an exercise price
8% above a benchmark share price of, say, the three-month trailing
average price. The second tranche might vest in two years and have
an exercise price 16% above the benchmark share price, and so on.
Each tranche would be exercisable over one to three years after it vests.
This structure is extremely well aligned with the annual RCEincentive
structure discussed above, and it would reinforce all the
same behaviors. Results matter more than variances, and the longterm
trend matters more than the year-to-year path. As opposed to
making annual grants, where a share price decline is almost rewarded
by granting new stock and options at lower prices, the inevitable short318
term share price fluctuations don’t matter much to the executive. This
package would provide a huge potential payoff if management is
very successful but precious little if they fail to create value. Though
this sort of plan carries a greater potential for retention risk if the
share price permanently declines, that must be weighed against the
prospect of much stronger motivation to succeed.
Even if such an approach doesn’t replace all other long-term
incentives, many companies will find that weaving some elements
of this into their normal compensation approach can be beneficial,
even if they choose not to embrace it completely. But whether such
an approach to long-term incentives is even contemplated, company
management and the compensation committee should be sure to
consider the behavior being encouraged as the primary determinant
of long-term incentive design.
Notes
1 Michael C. Jensen, “CEO Incentives: It’s Not How Much You Pay, But How,”
Harvard Business Review, no. 3 (May-June 1990).
2 Adapted from Gregory V. Milano, “A Theory of Relativity Misses the Mark,”
CFO.com, November 13, 2017, accessed January 15, 2019, http://ww2.cfo.com/
compensation/2017/11/theory-relativity-misses-mark/; see also Gregory V. Milano,
“The Relative TSR Conundrum,” Workspan magazine by WorldatWork, May
2018.
3 SCHEDULE 14A (Proxy Statement), filed by Varian Medical Systems, Inc., December
21, 2018.
4 SCHEDULE 14A (Proxy Statement), filed by National Oilwell Varco, Inc., March
30, 2018.
5 Stephen F. O’Byrne, “Total Compensation Strategy,” Journal of Applied Corporate
Finance 8, no. 2 (1995).
6 Stephen F. O’Byrne, “Measuring and Improving Pay for Performance,” in The
Handbook of Board Governance (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2016), 536–54.
7 James Collins and Jerry Porras, Built to Last: Successful Habits of Visionary Companies
(Harper Business, 2011 edition).
8 Bennett Stewart, “Remaking the Public Corporation from Within,” Harvard
Business Review, July-August 1990.