IN JANUARY 1992 I began working as an associate at Stern Stewart
& Co., primarily implementing EVA. Over more than a decade I
worked with more than one hundred companies in North America,
Europe, Asia, and Africa. With each successive client came a stronger
and more complete appreciation of EVA, not as a shiny, new
performance metric but rather as a means of motivating managers
to act more like long-term, committed owners.
I was—and still am—convinced that EVA is far superior to the
measures my clients were using before. As discussed previously, EVA
combined revenue growth, margin, and investment in a new and
practical way that helped companies implement better measures,
more effective management processes, and enhanced incentives.
Our goal was to change the mindset of managers, and it worked!
Nearly all my clients significantly increased their recognition of the
cost of capital and began treating their shareholders’ and lenders’
capital more like their own money. The EVA management framework
became popular, and by the late 1990s I was frequently invited
to speak at conferences to explain EVA and talk about the cultural
transformation I was helping to bring about.
Back then, I often described the benefits of EVA as akin to those
provided by a leveraged buyout (LBO), but without putting the
company at risk. The mostly successful 1980s wave of LBOs had left
an indelible mark on my thinking. Countless public companies were
taken private with a sliver of equity and a mountain of debt. If you
acquired a $100 million company with 10% equity and 90% debt, the
upside was potentially enormous. If you could increase the company
value by 10% to $110 million, the shareholders doubled the value of
their investment to $20 million because the debt stayed fixed at $90
million. If you doubled the value of the total company, the investors
could realize a $100 million gain—10 times their investment!
The ideal target was an undervalued, mature, and cash-generating
company in a stable industry with management that somehow
demonstrated an inability to control costs and capital spending. It
seemed like cash burned a hole in managements’ pockets like a $20
bill in a 17-year-old’s wallet—they couldn’t resist spending it.
Imagine a hypothetical company that could generate $500 million
a year in cash flow from producing and selling high-quality products.
The stable cash flows insulated management from any sense
of urgency. Over time, this destroyed whatever discipline might
otherwise have existed, leading to ballooning costs that cut the $500
million down to $400 million and to a penchant for capital spending
on unneeded and wasteful property, plant, and equipment that
consumed half the rest. The company was being valued in the stock
market based on delivering $200 million of sustainable cash flow
each year, when its real potential was $500 million. If the stock price
was $20, it could have been $50, or more. The squandered potential
resulted from management’s being too cozy to be concerned with
continuous growth and improvement. The real eye-opener of that
business best-seller Barbarians at the Gate1 was not the lengths to
which KKR and its rivals were willing to go to gain control of RJR
Nabisco, but rather the sheer waste of capital and value that was
occurring “inside the gates” under CEO Ross Johnson. And RJR
Nabisco could be viewed as just the tip of the iceberg in terms of
the kinds of corporate largess being dispensed before LBOs helped
rein it in. Suffice it to say, corporate airplanes probably shouldn’t
have been used to transport the beloved family dog.
Nothing lasts forever. Largely unbeknownst to the executives
leading these wasteful cash cows, by the early 1980s Michael Milken
had convinced a large group of investors that high-yield debt, or
junk bonds, had higher yields than warranted by their actual default
rates. This stimulated strong demand from investors for junk bonds,
which in turn provided the fuel for LBOs.
The demand by fixed-income investors for junk bonds made
it easier to borrow outrageous sums with almost no equity at all.
So private equity investors, such as KKR and Forstmann Little,
borrowed all they could and embarked on a company-buying spree.
It is estimated that some 2,000 LBOs valued at over $250 billion were
completed in the 1980s. And the vast majority were successful for the
investors. Often this success came with reduced employee numbers
and slashed capital budgets, which in turn reduced employment in
every mature U.S. industry with significant excess capacity, including
oil and gas, retail, tires, banking, airlines, paper, construction,
and financial services.
The heavy debt loads taken on by LBOs not only instilled an
urgency to drive cash flow, but had the effect, as Michael Jensen
put it, of “making the cost of capital both explicit and contractually
binding.”2 And putting this kind of pressure on management
proved highly effective in eradicating wasteful spending, purging
unnecessary capital investments, and instigating the sale of
noncore and underutilized assets. The cash flow generated by these
actions was typically enormous, which facilitated debt repayment
and distributions to the private equity investors. These actions
also tended to increase the eventual exit value after a period of
transformation.
As it is said, however, leverage cuts both ways. The substantial
potential upside was balanced by the immense financial risk imposed
by mountains of debt. If management struggled to turn the LBO
around, or if the changes happened too slowly, they would begin
missing required interest and principal payments on debt. This often
led to more draconian cuts that in many cases reduced the long-term
value of the company in order to meet short-term cash flow needs.
This ended up being bad for investors as well as for employees,
customers, vendors, and other stakeholders.
As the 1980s wore on, these risks became more significant,
and a greater percentage of LBO companies faltered. This was
largely due to the increase in LBO acquisition prices, which necessitated
taking on even more debt. These high prices were driven by
the generally rising stock market coupled with the bidding up of
acquisition price premiums as a result of the expanding number of
LBO investors—more than 600 by the end of the decade. The later
LBO-target companies were also often less suitable, since the most
attractive companies had already been acquired in prior transactions.
Toward the end of the decade, the perils of the LBO craze were
beginning to surface. Some of the largest buyouts went bankrupt,
including Revco and Federated Department Stores. It didn’t end well
for Drexel Burnham Lambert and Michael Milken, either.3 Though
there were many pains along the way, I believe the net effect of the
LBO wave in the 1980s was to the long-term benefit of both the
economy and the country. But in the short term, losing your job
never seems right, and the magnitude of job loss was attracting
enormous public—and political—interest.
I note two ironies here. First, many of the investors in the funds
raised by the private equity firms were pension plans. These organizations
were charged with protecting the retirement of countless
workers by intelligently and safely investing retirement assets. In their
pursuit of higher returns, on many occasions they backed investors
that significantly reduced job security for employees not greatly
different from those whose future they were supposed to protect.
The greater irony was in Washington, D.C., as it often is. Voters,
lobbying groups, and political action committees were outraged—
so senators and congressional representatives were outraged, too.
There was extensive criticism of LBOs, their management teams,
and the leaders of the private equity firms that pursued the deals.
In 1988, Representative Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois said, “There’s
no question that the Committee on Ways and Means will be looking
at leveraged buyouts and mergers and acquisitions—and do
something about it.”4
What all those individuals and institutions didn’t seem to realize
was that the government, and its poorly understood tax code,
had significantly increased the incentive to pursue LBOs in the
first place. Because interest payments are tax-deductible to the
company, profits paid out to lenders are only taxed once, as a tax
on the lenders. But equity profits are taxed first at the company
level and again when investors receive dividends or sell their shares.
This relative tax benefit of debt made the cost of borrowing much
cheaper for both the LBO firms and the companies they acquired.
All the tax that was saved by deducting enormous interest payments
on a large pile of debt accrued to the shareholder, which, after
a leveraged buyout, was the LBO firm and its fund investors. If
this debt tax benefit didn’t exist, there would have been far fewer
leveraged buyouts. But Congress couldn’t— and still can’t—agree
on a single tax system for shareholders, so the incentive for LBOs
persists today. So much for solutions from our congressional representatives.
Most political discussions at the time suggested that the solution
was to increase taxes on debt to put them in line with those on
equity. But some feared that this would render American companies,
and financial institutions, less competitive globally. The better
solution, they suggested, would be to adjust taxes on equity so that
they would be incurred only once. Many other countries take an
approach to level the cost of equity and debt without compromising
competitiveness. For example, Australia allows investors to use
the tax paid by the corporation as a credit against tax payable by
the investor. Such “franking” of the dividend, as the Aussies call it,
removes some of the incentive to pursue LBOs—and in a way that
helps maintain competitiveness.
To be fair, the tax benefit probably wasn’t enough by itself to
motivate many LBOs. The private equity (PE) firms and their investors
saw tremendous upside in finding companies with bloated spending
budgets, and they made piles of money by putting them on a crash
diet. So much of the spending was unnecessary that they often could
slash without any burn. And they motivated management of the
LBO’d companies with lucrative equity stakes, often at least partially
purchased by the executives by selling other investments or mortgaging
their homes. Almost all the capital was debt, so the cost of
capital, as Jensen implied, became a very real cash cost. It provided
a huge incentive to be successful—”make the debt payments or the
company goes bust, you lose your job, and your equity stake will be
worthless.” Most adventurers succeeded, and a large number delivered
extraordinarily high returns on investment. Unfortunately, some didn’t
succeed. Either the target company was a bad LBO target, or management
didn’t get it, or they were unlucky. And some good companies
disappeared—because LBOs are risky business.
These days, activist investors take a similar approach to identifying
target companies, but they avoid paying a control premium by only
buying a minority interest. These activists then seek to win over other
institutional investors in order to collectively pressure management
to embrace their own strategic agenda.
My point in all this is that leveraged buyouts, and even activist
investors, on average, actually serve a useful purpose. When a public
company is not reaching its true potential, it becomes an LBO or
activist target. I believe that aggregate U.S. national wealth is higher
today, and pension plans are better funded, because of LBOs along
with the cost and capital efficiency they have motivated. And this
had a salutary effect even on those many other companies that
worked hard to avoid being taken over in an LBO. But, as already
noted, in some cases LBOs failed, shareholders lost everything, and
many good people were out of work.
EVA Instills LBO-Like Incentives
What if we could create management incentives similar to those
in an LBO without taking on debt and putting the company at
risk? By basing management incentives on the improvement in
economic value added versus the prior year, EVA makes the cost
of capital very real, which encourages LBO-like cost cutting and
the paring of capital budgets. Management incentives reflect a
charge for the cost of capital, and bonuses only grow bigger if
EVA increases. This means the company is doing a better job of
covering the cost of capital: no excessive debt, no company at
risk, but incentives that are similar to those provided by an LBO.
It seemed so perfect.
Or so I thought…. As I worked on one EVA implementation
after another, I noticed that many of my clients substantially reduced
their investment in the business—even when overinvesting wasn’t
a problem. As a result, a number of them saw their growth slow
down and eventually stall. Sure, for a few years they would see EVA
jump higher as they cleared out cost inefficiencies and dealt with idle
assets. But there is a limit to how high you can drive profit margins
and asset productivity. If you cut too much fat, you eventually cut
into the muscle. And without investment and growth, EVA stalled.
Many companies became disenchanted and stopped using EVA after
a few years. Those, like me, who were convinced of the efficacy of
EVA, felt puzzled. We had thought EVA would become the universal
model for management!
Just as I started connecting these dots, I left Stern Stewart, and
a few years later I found myself at Credit Suisse after it acquired
HOLT Value Associates. I joined the Buyside Insights Group in investment
banking, where we used HOLT and other sophisticated equity
valuation techniques to advise companies on what might happen to
their share price if they made an acquisition or divestiture, bought
back stock, issued convertible debt, or pursued virtually any other
transaction that was influenced by equity valuation. Our group’s
role was most interesting.
The HOLT valuation framework5 is based on the net present
value of a real cash flow forecast derived from a prediction of fading
cash flow return on investment, or CFROI, and real asset growth.
The cash flow forecast is real—that is, before inflation—so it is
discounted at a market-derived real discount rate. (Don’t worry,
there won’t be a quiz on this.)
HOLT is a very sophisticated framework for valuation, which is
to say that it’s extremely complicated. It was designed for investors
who, on average, are a fairly numerate lot, so the complexity is fine.
But amid all the sophisticated complexity, HOLT has two features
that, while absolutely insightful, are very simple. The first is that
HOLT is “cash flow based,” so it doesn’t recognize depreciation as
a cost, and assets don’t decline in value as they get older. Indeed,
HOLT actually increases the value of assets by inflation, over time.
The second HOLT contribution was that, in addition to using
a return measure, HOLT explicitly forecasts an asset growth rate.
Thus, it recognizes the importance of not only earning high returns,
but also investing and growing an asset base, so long as the incremental
CFROI is high enough. It is not simply about quality, or the
percentage return; it is also about quantity—meaning the size of the
asset base. This stood at odds with the capital spending cuts I saw
at many of my EVA clients. During my nearly five years at Credit
Suisse, I pondered the implications over and over.
Unfortunately, my reflection was cut short by the largest financial
crisis since the Great Depression of 1929. Along with most of my
group, I was suddenly left looking for a job. Surveying the carnage,
I quickly realized there were few, if any, jobs for someone with my
specialized skills and experience. So, I decided that my only nearterm
path was to start my own shareholder-value advisory firm. I
managed to convince my friend and colleague John Cryan to join
me as a cofounder, and together we managed to persuade Frank
Hopson, my current partner, and Jeff Routh to join us.
It was March 2009 when we started the venture. The S&P 500
index bottomed at 57% below its 2007 peak on March 9, and nearly
everyone in the business world was in a state of shock. We surmised
that few companies would be interested in hiring us for any meaningful
consulting projects until the crisis stabilized, so we set out
to design a better mousetrap. John and I came up with all sorts
of ideas about better ways to measure performance, while Frank
and Jeff tested whether what we came up with actually worked in
capital markets.
Armed with our knowledge of EVA and HOLT, and with the
Capital IQ6 database of financial and market information, we began
testing our ideas. Our objective was to see if we could design a
measure that was (1) simple enough to explain, even to those with no
financial background, and (2) accurate enough for us to be confident
that increases in it would consistently create value.
John, Frank, Jeff, and I thought hard about this new approach.
We considered how to treat aspects of financial performance such
as depreciation, R&D, leases, and taxes. From this process we
created Residual Cash Earnings, or RCE, our standard measure
of performance. Over time we customized different versions of
RCE for various companies, including Varian Medical Systems and
National Oilwell Varco, among others. Of the many performance
measures that I have worked with over the last three decades, RCE
remains the most useful and effective for corporate management
applications.
Don Chew had been my partner at Stern Stewart. Although I
don’t claim to have reviewed every financial journal in existence,
Don’s Journal of Applied Corporate Finance is by far the most insightful,
useful, and readable of those I have seen. He is a wonderful
editor. Whenever I’ve written for the journal, Don pushes me to be
sure I have thought through my points and my arguments and have
explained them thoroughly. He is a pleasure to work with. When
we invented RCE, Don gave me the opportunity to publish “Postmodern
Corporate Finance,”7 where I presented and then explained
the potential uses and benefits of this new measure.
As I wrote in the article, postmodern architecture builds on the
open floor plan style that evolved during the modernist movement
while adding back ornamentation from earlier classical periods.
In similar fashion, “postmodern” corporate finance builds on the
principles of modern corporate finance. At the same time, it restores
part of the emphasis on top-line growth that prevailed before the
intense emphasis on returns on capital that was brought on by the
ongoing shareholder value movement.
The most important difference between RCE and EVA is the
treatment of depreciation. EVA recognizes accounting depreciation
as a cost, while RCE does not. EVA reduces the capital on which
management must earn a return by accumulated depreciation, while
again RCE does not. To many, these probably sound like painstaking
accounting details that can and should be left to the green-eyeshaded
accounting team. I wish it were so. But the difference in the behavior
that is motivated by RCE versus EVA is dramatic.
The significance can be illustrated with a simple example, which
is depicted rather extensively in figure 7. What if your company
invested $1 million in an asset that has a five-year accounting life?
Let’s assume that such assets typically stay in service for about seven
years, that the asset generates EBITDA of $240,000 in the first year,
and that this grows at 3% per year. The weighted average cost of
capital is, say, 8%, which is pretty common these days with interest
rates as low as they are.
Before going any further, forget accounting for a moment. Forget
big-corporation finance. Let’s take a very practical view. If you owned
a small business and shelled out money to expand, you would be
quite happy with a pretax cash return of 24% (i.e., $240,000 divided
by $1,000,000), especially if this were expected to rise by 3% per
year for seven years. And standard corporate finance tools back this
up; the after-tax internal rate of return, or IRR, is over 14.7%—well
above our 8% weighted average cost of capital. The investment seems
desirable through both a practical and a theoretical lens.
What about the EVA lens? Since the asset has a five-year accounting
depreciation life, there will be depreciation of $200,000 per year,
which leaves taxable income of $40,000 ($240,000 of cash flow less
$200,000 of depreciation). At a 21% tax rate, the taxes would be
$8,400, which leaves $31,600 of NOPAT, or net operating profit after
taxes. If we calculate the capital charge based on the beginning capital
of $1,000,000 using an 8% weighted average cost of capital, we get
a capital charge of $80,000. So, EVA in the first year is $31,600 of
NOPAT less $80,000 of capital charge, or negative $48,400. Not a
great motivator to make the investment if we are paying executives
to increase EVA! At least for this investment, the EVA lens isn’t very
consistent with the practical or theoretical lens.
$000s Year 0 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 Year 7
Input Data
EBITDA 3% 240.0 247.2 254.6 262.3 270.1 278.2 286.6
Depreciation (200.0) (200.0) (200.0) (200.0) (200.0)
Pretax Profit 40.0 47.2 54.6 62.3 70.1 278.2 286.6
Tax 21% (8.4) (9.9) (11.5) (13.1) (14.7) (58.4) (60.2)
Gross Book Value 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0
Accumulated Depreciation (200.0) (400.0) (600.0) (800.0)
(1,000.
0)
(1,000.
0)
(1,000.
0)
Net Book Value 1,000.0 800.0 600.0 400.0 200.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Economic Value
Added (EVA)
NOPAT 31.6 37.3 43.1 49.2 55.4 219.8 226.4
Average Net Book Value 900.0 700.0 500.0 300.0 100.0 0.0 0.0
EVA Capital Charge 8% (80.0) (64.0) (48.0) (32.0) (16.0) 0.0 0.0
EVA (48.4) (26.7) (4.9) 17.2 39.4 219.8 226.4
NPV 238.5 = 24% of investment
Residual Cash Earnings
(RCE)
Gross Cash Earnings 231.6 237.3 243.1 249.2 255.4 219.8 226.4
Gross Operating Assets 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0
Average Gross Operating Assets 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0
RCE Capital Charge 10% (100.0) (100.0) (100.0) (100.0) (100.0) (100.0) (100.0)
RCE 131.6 137.3 143.1 149.2 155.4 119.8 126.4
NPV 671.5 = 67% of investment
Returns & Free
Cash Flow
ROCE 3.5% 5.3% 8.6% 16.4% 55.4% N/A N/A
FCF
(1,000.
0) 231.6 237.3 243.1 249.2 255.4 219.8 226.4
IRR 14.7% = +83% over the 8% cost of capital (i.e. 14.7%/8%)
Figure 7—EVA and RCE over Time
If we are trying to motivate managers to make value-adding
investments, and if EVA pays them a smaller first-year bonus for
making an investment that delivers a 14.7% IRR versus an 8%
weighted average cost of capital, we have a problem. Corporate
managers typically prefer a higher bonus—as they should—and
they can achieve it in this case by forgoing the investment. What’s
more, it doesn’t get any better in years two or three, as it takes
until year four for the EVA contribution of this investment to be
positive and to yield a higher cumulative bonus payment for the
executive.
If we keep everything the same but increase the first-year
cash flow from the investment, EVA breaks even in the first year
when the IRR rises to over 20%. That’s two and a half times the
weighted average cost of capital. Investments of this nature that
earn 12%, 15%, or even 18% internal rates of return over the life
of the investments would have negative first-year EVA and would
reduce the bonuses earned by executives tasked with improving
EVA. In some cases, executives step up and say, “Though this project
takes a long time to pay off, we are still making the investment
in the future.” But most of the time the investment isn’t actually
made. As the analysis shows, EVA stifles positive investment.
And this situation gets worse as the growth rate increases. The
investment in our example generating zero EVA in year one delivers
an IRR even higher than 20% when we increase the EDITBA
growth rate above 3%. EVA not only stifles growth, it provides an
even tougher hurdle for investments that deliver higher growth
rates, since the IRR of projects that deliver zero year-one EVA
would be that much higher than for lower-growth investments.
This is unfortunate, but it may explain why tech industries, which
often have higher than average growth rates, were less frequent
adopters of EVA. The same is true in reverse. A mature industry
with little growth, or even experiencing contraction, would face
less of a “stifled investment” problem with EVA. Said differently,
the mature cash cows that made good LBO targets were also fine
platforms for EVA, but for companies with any sort of growth
opportunities, EVA stifled that growth.
The root cause of these behavioral problems is depreciation.
For the original purposes of accounting, which was to represent a
reasonable view of profits and a conservative view of the balance
sheet, depreciation makes sense. If I were a lender assessing the
assets to back up my loan, I would like the idea of using depreciated
net property, plant, and equipment. There is much less risk that
I will be caught lending to a company with assets that are worth
much less than book value. Accounting as a practice isn’t wrong;
it just wasn’t made for measuring value creation.
Perhaps depreciation is best viewed from the perspective of an
investor in a private company. Imagine that your neighbor Irma
approaches you with a business idea. She wants to open a store
selling work boots, and she explains all the reasons why she believes
she will be successful. You don’t like investing with friends, but
you think Irma is smart and business savvy; further, you believe
the idea might even work.
You and your spouse agree to invest $50,000 in Irma’s new
store. During the decision process, you evaluate alternative possible
investments and how this might compare in terms of the upside
opportunity and downside risk. You tell Irma you would be satisfied
with earning 10% on your investment. Obviously, you’d like
as much as possible, but you say you’d be satisfied with 10%. Irma
says she understands your goal and appreciates the clarity.
A year later, Irma drops by and hands you a check for $5,000.
You express your satisfaction along with your interest in how things
will go the following year. At the end of year two, Irma hands you
a check for $4,000, but is surprised at your dissatisfaction. When
your spouse calls Irma’s attention to your expectation of a 10%
return on the investment, Irma responds that the accountants
have depreciated the assets. The original investment for $50,000
amounted to a $40,000 net book value at the start of year two, she
explains. She waxes eloquent about how accounting depreciation
works, and then does the math out loud to demonstrate that the
$4,000 check is, as she says again, a 10% return on investment. You
and your spouse stare at Irma in silence, as if she had four heads.
A similar argument can be made in a corporation. Investors
want a return on their investment. They are not concerned with
depreciation and other noncash accounting charges. They just want
a cash return on the cash they gave you. Residual Cash Earnings
works this way.
The definition of Residual Cash Earnings is gross cash earnings
(GCE), minus a capital charge calculated by multiplying the
company’s Required Return by its gross operating assets (GOA).
GCE is essentially EBITDA after tax, except, where material,
we add back R&D and lease expense. GOA represents the undepreciated
investment in the business that must earn a return. It
includes operating working capital, such as accounts receivable
and inventory, plus gross property, plant, and equipment, as well
as other operating assets, including capitalized R&D and leases
when material. It is critical that we use gross property, plant,
and equipment, not net. Since we are not charging for depreciation,
we need to keep recognizing a capital charge based on the
original cost, or gross property, plant, and equipment value. The
formal definition of RCE also contains an inflation adjustment.
But because inflation has been low for some time, we have not
implemented this step in practice, to make the measure a bit
easier to understand.
Let’s go back to the $1 million investment discussed above.
To determine RCE, we must first calculate GCE and GOA. Since
depreciation is not a charge to RCE, the GCE would be $240,000
of cash flow less the $8,400 of tax, or $231,600. The Required
Return in RCE is derived from the relationship of market values
to GCE, and is higher than the weighted average cost of capital
for most companies. If the Required Return were 10%, which is
higher than the 8% weighted average cost of capital,8 then the
capital charge would be the $1,000,000 of GOA multiplied by 10%,
or $100,000. So RCE would be $231,600 of GCE less $100,000 of
capital charge, or $131,600. For managers who are being paid to
increase it, RCE provides a positive signal to go ahead and invest
in this value-creating project.
RCE measures after-tax cash flow, in the form of GCE in relation
to a capital charge based on GOA, multiplied by a Required
Return. The noncash depreciation charges are ignored, except to
the extent that they shield taxes. The noncash reduction in asset
values from accumulated depreciation is ignored, as well. With
RCE, positive performance is recognized sooner and more evenly
over the life of the investment. Notice in figure 8 that when the
tax payments jump in years six and seven, RCE declines rather
than increases, as is the case for EVA and ROCE.
Companies that are investing heavily in growth tend to look
better from the perspective of RCE than that of EVA. The combination
of high depreciation and high capital charges on assets that
are relatively new weighs heavily on EVA. By contrast, companies
that are making few investments, and that are essentially milking
old assets, tend to look worse in RCE, mainly because it steps up
the value of depreciated assets to gross book value and so recognizes
their original costs.
Figure 8 illustrates the differences between EVA and RCE for
this example:
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Cost of Ownership (EVA)
EVA Capital Charge Depreciation AT
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Cost of Ownership (RCE)
RCE Capital Charge
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Residual Cash Earnings
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Economic Value Added
New assets appear expensive.
Old assets
appear cheap…
…or free.
Delayed recognition of
value discourages
investment.
Most of the value appears at
the end, encouraging the
milking of old assets.
Smooth recognition of value over asset life.
RCE dips
when taxes
rise.
Constant cost of ownership as long as in service.
Note: Simulates the Economic Value Added and Residual Cash Earnings of an asset with a five-year accounting
life and a seven-year actual life. The IRR is 14.7%, which is 1.8 times the 8% cost of capital.
Figure 8—EVA and RCE Cost of Ownership
As can be seen in figure 8, RCE provides a smooth recognition of
value over the life of an investment; by so doing, it presents decisionmakers
with the clearest possible incentive to undertake positive
investments while discouraging the milking of old assets that are not
expected to provide long-term value. More so than any other measure,
when RCE rises, it does so because good actions were taken that
benefit both the business and the share price. And when RCE declines,
one can be confident it is because performance—as conceived of in
terms of NPV—has also declined. Using RCE dramatically improves
the ability of companies to consistently reward good performance
and penalize bad performance.
Consider what happens with less effective measures, especially
when they are linked to compensation. Most financial performance
management in U.S. businesses revolves around performance
measured against a budget. This way, goals can be set at the start of
the year. For example, if the company uses EBITDA or operating
profit, they can set goals expressed in terms of these metrics that
reflect what they have agreed to at the start of the year. If a lot of
investment has been made, the targets may be raised. Externalities
can be incorporated, as well.
But, as we saw in earlier chapters, a big problem arises when
performance targets are set on the basis of budgets: Doing so
effectively eliminates any emphasis on delivering results in terms
of true, multiyear improvements in performance for shareholders.
Since poor value-creating business units tend to have dire
outlooks, they also tend to be assigned modest goals that don’t
imply much value creation. At the same time, star businesses
are often assigned “stretch goals.” Ironically, in many cases the
nonvalue creators earn as much bonus as the top value creators,
or even more. Any possibility of getting managers to think about
opportunities and accountabilities like owners do is cast by the
wayside. The negotiation of the budget often has more impact on
rewards than performance does.
Two steps are required to fix this and to focus behavior on true
improvements in performance. First, stop measuring performance
against budgets, and begin measuring against the prior year. Second,
implement RCE, which provides a sufficiently comprehensive view
of overall performance that improvement over the prior year is
almost always a reliable indicator of value added.
The primary goal is to increase both total shareholder return
(TSR) and RCE through balanced improvements in growth,
margin, and asset efficiency. If the business has zero RCE margin,
growth will not help, except to the extent that it leverages fixed
costs and capacity, and improves the RCE margin. In this case,
the focus of management is automatically shifted by RCE to
margin and asset productivity improvements. For a business with
a high RCE margin, the focus will be on investing aggressively in
growth, even if some RCE margin has to be sacrificed. The goal
is to grow RCE year-on-year and year-after-year. Sometimes RCE
will decline in a single year following large investments. But this
will pay off for managers only if in a later year RCE rebounds
when the investment pays off. If it never pays off, management
will be paid less—period. This absolute accountability focuses
attention on making all effective investments and on culling
investments in both capital and R&D that are not adequately
promising.
The RCE measure is comprehensive and complete, and
enables a manager to make tradeoffs, evaluate alternatives, and
optimize performance. To better understand how and why RCE
rises or falls, we developed the “Five Tools of Value Creation,”
which will be discussed in chapter 4. Two of the five tools are the
Reinvestment Rate, which measures the amount of GCE that is
reinvested back into the business, and Reinvestment Effectiveness,
which indicates the amount of actual revenue growth delivered
per dollar of investment. Both these measures are generally
considered over three- or five-year periods, and can be incorporated
into incentives. The use of these two measures over
a multiyear horizon is designed to ensure that a manager who
achieves RCE improvements while making good future investments
will be paid more than one who simply delivers RCE while
cutting investment.
The RCE approach will always encourage management to
pursue the optimal balance of growth and returns. Figure 9
shows “Iso-TSR” lines that indicate the relative value of improving
either returns or growth, given the current state of each. The
main message of the figure is that for companies already earning
returns that are well above the cost of capital, but achieving
modest growth rates, incremental growth tends to be perceived
by the market as more valuable than increasing the already high
returns. Conversely, for companies experiencing rapid growth in
sales and even earnings, the market—at least at some point—is
likely to respond more positively to increases in returns than to
further growth. Another way of thinking about this growth-return
tradeoff is that, merely by virtue of management’s focus on one
of these two goals in the recent past, pursuit of the other becomes
likely to create more value.
ΔReturn
Revenue Growth
Iso-TSR Line Illustration
Different combinations of return and
growth can lead to the same TSR
Figure 9—Balancing Growth and Return
People often question whether giving up returns for growth can
really lead to better TSR. So, my colleagues and I studied the facts.
As reported in my paper “Don’t Be Too Preoccupied with Return
on Capital,”9 sacrificing returns to achieve higher revenue growth
worked for most companies over the full decade of the study, which
ran from 2000 through the end of 2009. The study sample included the
1,000 largest nonfinancial U.S. companies as of 12/31/2009, excluding
those not public for the entire 10-year period of the study—for a total
of 765 companies. Although only 14% of the companies had both
higher revenue growth and lower return on capital in the second half
of the decade, 57% of these higher-growth, lower-return companies
generated TSR above the median. Among these were several wellknown
companies, including Oracle, PepsiCo, CVS Caremark, and
Procter & Gamble.
Oracle illustrates this well. During the first half of the decade, the
company’s return on capital hovered between 33% and 36%, while
its growth averaged only 3%. And Oracle’s TSR underperformed the
NASDAQ in those five years. During the second half of the decade,
Oracle invested heavily, acquiring Peoplesoft, BEA Systems, Seibel,
and Hyperion; growth surged to an average of 18% while return on
capital collapsed to the 15%-to-25% range. This investment in growth
delighted investors, and TSR outpaced the NASDAQ by 73%. Figure
10 illustrates the year-by-year performance trends.
-15%
-10%
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
Revenue Growth
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
Return on Capital
-40%
-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Dec-99 Dec-04 Dec-09
Relative TSR
Figure 10—Oracle Growth, Return, and TSR
An overemphasis on growth or return often reflects the corporate
culture. Some companies, such as Mylan and Alliance Data Systems
over the last five years, have been so concerned with growth that
they never seem to deliver solid returns. Other companies, like The
Gap and IBM also over the last five years, have been so protective
of their high returns that they have forgone growth. In both cases,
these companies’ TSR has suffered. Yet a number of companies have
succeeded in balancing the two objectives to deliver superior TSR,
for example Microsoft and Electronic Arts over the last five years.
One Important Adjustment to RCE
To ensure that RCE is comprehensive and encourages the right behavior,
in businesses where R&D is critical, an adjustment may be needed.
In these situations, RCE should be defined by excluding the R&D
expense from the calculation of Gross Cash Earnings and adding the
capitalized R&D investment to Gross Operating Assets. The standard
approach is to accumulate the prior five years of R&D spending and
treat it as an asset. In some businesses with longer investment cycles,
it is better to use more than five years as the weighted average life, so
as to reflect the longer expected payoffs from the R&D. At the same
time, it’s important to recognize that the weighted average life of a
company’s R&D investments is often considerably shorter than the
average life of its successful R&D investments, since unsuccessful R&D
investments tend to get weeded out earlier—and the earlier the better.
By capitalizing R&D we seek a better relationship between movements
in RCE and TSR and, perhaps more important, better decisions
by management. For example, sometimes managers squeeze
R&D budgets to meet short-term EPS and other goals. They are, in
essence, sacrificing the long-term value of the business to meet these
short-term objectives, which is generally not in the best interest of
shareholders. At other times, the pursuit of steady growth in EPS leads
management to spread out R&D spending over multiple accounting
periods, despite the evidence that investing more aggressively early
on, or less evenly in general, may yield better results.
A case in point was Monsanto in the late 1990s, which had implemented
EVA with R&D capitalized as an investment. At the time,
I was the Stern Stewart project manager assigned to the company.
As an interesting aside, Monsanto simultaneously hired the Boston
Consulting Group (BCG), which uses HOLT. As a consequence, the
ultimate measures and strategic direction turned out to be more of a
hybrid than would have been recommended by either Stern Stewart
or BCG alone, and were closer to what we advocate today as RCE.
(The leadership of Monsanto was ahead of its time.)
During our work with the company, Monsanto faced some tough
decisions regarding the timing of R&D and product-launch expenditures
in its Searle pharmaceutical business unit. If they accelerated
expenditures, EPS would suffer. If they spread the expenditures out
over multiple accounting periods, the launches would be delayed, and
the time from launch to patent expiry would be shortened. A Wall
Street Journal article10 documented the story. The following are excerpts:
Third-quarter results will be weighed down by a 40% increase
in research spending at Searle, Monsanto said. That unit currently
has five drugs in advanced-testing stages, when development costs
are particularly high.
“In our judgment, aggressive funding is warranted to make
sure that [new] products reach the market quickly,” with speedy
regulatory approvals and broad public acceptance, Chairman Robert
B. Shapiro said in a prepared statement. “The costs associated with
these activities have depressed current income,” he said.
In response to this news, a NatWest Securities analyst, Mark Wilamuth,
said he would lower his 1997 earnings-per-share estimate to
$1.20 from $1.28 and his 1998 per-share estimate to $1.40 from $1.60.
But how did the market respond to this information? Monsanto closed
$1 higher at $39.6875 on the day of the announcement.
Undoubtedly, many companies would benefit from employing
a similar accelerated investment strategy, but they seem to be too
preoccupied with meeting the short-term EPS consensus of security
analysts to pursue it. This is not to say that all R&D spending is
always good. The two virtues of treating R&D as an investment are
(1) the enhanced incentive to invest without regard to short-term
EPS implications, and (2) the enhanced accountability for delivering
a return on the R&D over time. If a company invests millions
in R&D that is unsuccessful, it will have to bear a capital charge on
the capitalized R&D for five or more years. But by increasing both
the incentive to invest and the accountability for delivering returns,
we encourage decision-making by management that is more aligned
with the interests of owners.
Some say that a focus on EPS growth doesn’t dissuade management
from making the right decisions on R&D spending. Many managers
may be out there who are willing to forgo short-term praise and
financial rewards to do the right thing for the long-term success of
their business. But why have a system that requires management to
override their own best interests? Why not use incentives that make
“the right thing” for managers and shareholders one and the same?
The same case can be made for other investments that are treated
as period expenses in accounting. Among these are marketing expenditures
aimed at building long-term brand value, training expenditures
that seek to improve employee skills, and information systems
expenses that are intended to augment long-term capabilities. For
many companies, these expensed investments are growing, which
creates a growing distortion of their accounting statements. In each
of these cases, if the item is material and important, better behavior
can be motivated by treating the item as an investment. It is much
harder to do any capital market research on these items, since there
are no consistent accounting standards for their disclosure as there
is for R&D.
So, in RCE we don’t depreciate fixed assets, and we capitalize R&D
only when it’s material. Is that it? No, we must perform one more
standard accounting adjustment to define RCE. Some companies make
extensive use of operating leases. So, to normalize the measurement
of leased versus owned assets, we add back the rent to GCE, and we
add the present value of lease commitments to GOA. Note that this
doesn’t make RCE the same between leased and owned assets—it
simply applies the same treatment. Leases can be quite strategic, as
discussed in chapter 12, and our treatment recognizes this.
The importance of customizing measures for the characteristics and
needs of a company cannot be overstated. Consider something as simple
as whether cash should be included in the asset base when measuring
returns and economic profits. Most performance measurement
seeks to separate operating and financing elements. So, in theory, the
“operating cash” needed to run the business should be included in the
asset base, and excess cash should be considered essentially negative
debt. But if the primary objective is to motivate operating decisions
that convert working capital and underutilized fixed assets to cash,
as is often the case, then it may be best to exclude all cash from the
asset base. As a result, as soon as an asset is converted to cash, it is
recognized and rewarded. If cash is left in the asset base, no credit is
given when assets are converted to cash.
But if the company has historically been a chronic underinvestor,
and the goal is to promote operating-asset investment, then maybe
cash should be left in the asset base. This way, whether management
reinvests it or not, it incurs a capital charge. That will tend to motivate
investment but may also overencourage distributions. Also, some
companies have trouble getting subsidiaries to sweep cash up to the
parent. Yet by including the cash in the asset base of the subsidiaries,
this encourages transferring cash to corporate.
Naturally, there is no single right answer that applies to all
companies and situations. Therefore, the customization of RCE for
a particular business involves the specification of adjustments to GAAP
accounting, which in turn requires the careful consideration of key
financial measurement issues. In the interest of simplicity, though,
such adjustments to accounting should be made only when the benefits
far outweigh the complexity. A full evaluation of data availability and
objectivity, behavioral implications, and materiality should guide
the prioritization. As discussed further in chapter 9, multi-business
companies also need to specify the methodology for transfer pricing
and also, more generally, that for treating shared costs and assets.
Notes
1 Bryan Burrough and John Helyar, Barbarians at the Gate: The Fall of RJR Nabisco
(New York: HarperBusiness, 2008).
2 See Michael C. Jensen, “Corporate Control and the Politics of Finance,” Journal
of Applied Corporate Finance 4, no. 2 (1991): 13–34.
3 See “Leveraged Buyout,” Wikipedia, December 28, 2018, accessed January 15,
2019, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leveraged_buyout#1980s.
4 Robert D. Hershey Jr., Special to the New York Times, “Congress Is Moving Closer
to Acting on Buyout Curbs,” New York Times, December 5, 1988, accessed January
15, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/1988/12/05/business/congress-is-movingcloser-
to-acting-on-buyout-curbs.html.
5 For more on the HOLT framework, see Bart Madden, CFROI Valuation (Burlington,
VT: Elsevier Science, 1999); see also David Holland and Bryant Matthews, Beyond
Earnings: Applying the HOLT CFROI and Economic Profit Framework (Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley, 2018).
6 Capital IQ is a database produced and marketed by S&P Global: https://www.
spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/solutions/sp-capital-iq-platform .
7 Gregory V. Milano, “Postmodern Corporate Finance,” Journal of Applied Corporate
Finance 22, no. 2 (Spring 2010): 48–59.
8 Gregory V. Milano, Steven C. Treadwell, Jeffrey L. Routh, and Joseph Theriault,
“A Fresh Look at the Required Return,” Buona Fortuna!, February 13, 2012.
9 Gregory V. Milano, “Don’t Be Too Preoccupied with Return on Capital,” SSRN
Electronic Journal, 2010.
10 Peter Fritsch, “Monsanto Warns R&D Spending May Depress Third-Quarter
Net,” Wall Street Journal, September 29, 1997, accessed January 15, 2019, https://
www.wsj.com/articles/SB875312098246726500.