BUSINESS OWNERS, LIKE all people, are a diverse lot, and the
company cultures they create vary greatly. But some common characteristics
set owners apart from the typical manager or employee.
They tend to be more motivated to make their businesses prosperous,
because so much of their personal success and satisfaction is
tied up in the business. Owners often strive to accomplish objectives
that seem unrealistic to others, and they don’t mind, and may even
prefer, being the underdog.
Few public companies have ownership cultures. Yet over the years,
it has always seemed to me that ownership cultures perform better. So,
it is important for public company executives first to fully understand
their company culture (and its gaps) and then to develop a plan to
align it with ownership values. And this is not soft and fluffy stuff to
keep up appearances; it is objective and factual. Getting the culture
right is likely to be as critical to the success of the organization as
anything else a CEO does.
Motivated to Succeed
For anyone who’s played or watched sports, it’s clear that momentum
plays an important role in outcomes. When a series of plays goes
well, confidence trickles down the roster and fuels a conviction that
the team can—and will—win. In the same way, a leader who exudes
confidence can motivate those around her or him.
This all may sound like marketing nonsense, but when these
sparks ignite, they are palpable—electricity in the air, chills down your
back, massive crowds animated with an ecstatic fervor. And when
they occur against all odds, they are nothing short of sensational.
When the New York Giants defeated the otherwise undefeated New
England Patriots in Super Bowl XVII in 2008, it was a true Cinderella
story. The Giants were the underdog in every round of the playoffs
and somehow performed so improbably well that they were able
to knock off heavyweight after heavyweight, eventually winning
the championship game by three points. The Giants fed off a surge
in momentum late in the game, held the “unstoppable” Patriots to
only 14 points, and came back to win it all in the final minutes. Their
performance was spectacular, almost surreal at times—and all this
after barely making the playoffs!
Few sports analysts or Vegas casinos believed that a Giant victory
over the Patriots was even remotely possible. But as was obvious to
everyone watching the game, the Giants had other ideas. They may
not have been the best team in the NFL that year, but they were the best
team throughout the postseason, and certainly on the field that day.
Admittedly, I live in the New York area and am a Giants fan, so
perhaps this example comes off a bit strong—my apologies to Patriots
fans. To be fair to Boston-area readers, let me also recall another
spectacular, perhaps even less probable, comeback. In 2004, the Boston
Red Sox trailed the New York Yankees three games to none in the
American League Championship Series—and then they did something
no baseball team had ever done in over a century of major league
baseball playoffs: They came back from a three-games-to-zero deficit
to win the series by winning four games in a row (and I can still feel
the pain). The Red Sox broke the alleged “curse of the bambino,”
which was said to plague the team since it traded away Babe Ruth
soon after its (then) last World Series Championship in 1918.
The same sort of upsets occur across the pond, as well. The
Union of European Football Associations (UEFA)—yes, that’s soccer
in “American”—conducts a Champions League competition each
year that pits the best teams from each country’s top league against
each other. It starts with a few qualification rounds followed by a
very rigorous 32-club group stage, and then a 16-club knockout-style
tournament to determine a champion. The format is similar to that
of the World Cup, but with twice as many fixtures, so each club can
play both at home and away against each opponent. Only the final is
played at a neutral stadium.
In the 2004–2005 Champions League, one of the teams to qualify
for the group stage by successfully navigating the qualification rounds
was Liverpool F.C. The club had finished fourth the year before in
the English Premier League and was not considered a likely challenger
for the Champions League title. In an unexpected run, Liverpool
made it to the Champions League final against A.C. Milan but
was still considered the underdog to win it all that night in Istanbul.
After the kickoff, Liverpool’s odds cratered when Milan scored three
unanswered goals before halftime. For those who are unfamiliar with
typical soccer score lines, most fans would have considered this game
to be over already—the odds against coming back to win the final
must have been positively enormous.
But, like the Giants in 2008 and the Sox in 2004, the Liverpool
players had other ideas. In the second half the Liverpool captain,
Steven Gerrard, scored first, then two more goals followed to bring
the match to a tie. Liverpool and Milan held the 3–3 tie through the
end of the match, including “extra time.” So, it all came down to
penalty kicks, and Liverpool won 3–2 after its goalie, Jerzy Dudek,
saved two penalties. Liverpool had done the unthinkable. Even the
Argentine legend Diego Maradona said, “The English club proved that
miracles really do exist. I’ve now made Liverpool my English team.”
Still, this wasn’t enough for Liverpool F.C. In the 2018–2019
Champions League semifinal, it did it again. The club was down
3–0 on aggregate after the first leg of the semifinal, and scored four
unanswered goals to beat the favorite, F.C. Barcelona, and advance
to, and win, the final. What are the odds? (66:1.)1
How did the New York Giants, Boston Red Sox, and Liverpool
F.C. pull off these improbable victories, and what lessons can be
learned that apply to corporate management? Many come to mind,
but perhaps the most important one is not to rely solely on what
seems achievable but instead to stretch for what seems unachievable.
Momentum comes from confidence and conviction, and leaders must
foster these attributes in their teams, even when facing discouraging
odds. While cautious incrementalism has become the norm in many
of today’s businesses, it’s indisputable that the drive to create new
products and services, pursue and conquer new and existing markets,
and develop new ways of doing business remains the largest source
of value creation across all industries and economies.
Indeed, the great business success stories of recent decades, including
those of Bill Gates, Warren Buffett, Steve Jobs, and Jeff Bezos,
among many others, did not happen by playing it safe and striving
only for the achievable. Successful entrepreneurs challenge themselves
and their organizations to step beyond what seems possible to
redefine what can be done.
These days, though, corporate leaders are often more concerned
with avoiding failure than achieving success. In the wake of a series
of spectacular management catastrophes—including Enron, World-
Com, Bernie Madoff ’s Ponzi schemes, and the 2008 subprime mortgage
disaster and subsequent financial crisis—far greater attention is
now being paid to risk management. The U.S. Congress has passed
measures to compel companies, in particular financial institutions,
to better manage risk. Shareholders have expressed outrage by the
size and speed of losses in many cases and have pressed companies
to be more careful. The industry of risk management experts and
tacticians has grown in size and scope, and senior corporate risk
management executives play a more-direct role in the management
and governance of public companies. And the more recent escalation
of cyber risks has added even more fuel to the risk-management fire.
It will be interesting to see if this emphasis on risk management leads
to fewer catastrophes.
Though it is extremely important to manage risks, many companies
have taken doing so to such an extreme that, for fear of making
bad investments, they have passed up on countless good ones. As
Roberto Goizueta, a former Chairman and CEO of the Coca-Cola
Company, said, “The moment avoiding failure becomes your motivation,
you’re down the path of inactivity. You stumble only if you’re
moving.” He also remarked, “If you take risks, you may fail. But if
you do not take risks, you will surely fail. The greatest risk of all is
to do nothing.”2 This is perhaps the business-world equivalent of
hockey legend Wayne Gretzky’s famous line, “You miss 100 percent
of the shots you don’t take.”
Many exceptions can be noted to this wisdom, but it seems that
most people really do want to fit in and limit their errors (think “loss
aversion”); many do so by avoiding potentially value-adding risks.
Taking a risk and failing can result in severe punishment, including
humiliation or getting fired, while maintaining the status quo typically
leads to consistent, but limited, rewards. This paves the way to less
investment, less growth, and overall less value creation.
Since about 2000, when the tech bubble burst, U.S. public companies
have collectively invested less in growth. To prove this point, I gathered
various key financial data points on a large sample of companies going
back to 1996. I started with the current Russell 1000 membership, and
then eliminated financial, real estate, and utility companies, because
they have different investment patterns and financial metrics. Next, I
eliminated any company that did not have full information for all the
years studied and was left with a sample of 316 companies. To get
a rough measure of growth investment, I calculated the aggregate
capital expenditures each year for all 316 companies and subtracted
the aggregate depreciation. The general assumption here is that when
capital expenditures equal depreciation, a company is sustaining itself;
and when capital expenditures are above depreciation, the surplus comes
from growth investment. For any one company, this approximation can
be off for various reasons. But when viewed in aggregate and normalized
as a percentage of net income, it provides a fairly good indicator
of how much managements are investing in growth.
What did I find? As can be seen in figure 64, the proportion of net
income being invested in future growth was quite high in the latter
half of the 1990s. But it fell in the first decade of the new millennium,
and has fallen further in the current one. The graph on the right
(displaying the CAGR, or compound annual growth rate) shows that
when growth investment fell, growth in revenue dropped, as well.
Many companies say they don’t invest because they feel concerned
that the economic growth won’t be there to create the demand for
the products and services that their investments will seek to deliver.
But isn’t this merely a chicken-and-egg problem? If companies were
investing more, they would employ more people, and consumers
would have more money, so they would spend more—and the virtuous
cycle of capitalism would prevail! But since we tend to extrapolate
without considering cyclical effects, when the economy is down, or
growing slowly, we act as if it will be that way forever and miss the
opportunity to invest and benefit from the next upswing.
26.6%
16.8%
12.3%
1996-2000 2001-2010 2011-2017
CapEx-Depreciation as
Percentage of Net Income
10.5%
6.6%
2.4%
1996-2000 2001-2010 2011-2017
Revenue Growth CAGR
Figure 64—Growth Investment Drives Revenue Growth
On top of the behavioral impact of the heightened risk aversion
discussed above, many executives have become infatuated with efficiency
and productivity, as reflected in the increased prominence of
percentage measures like profit margins and rates of return on capital.
Sometimes, they feel so concerned about maximizing these measures
that they forgo good investments that may pay off over time but that
reduce their percentage measures in the short term. They become
so obsessed with the quality of performance (margins and returns)
that they forget to balance it with quantity (growth). In figure 65, we
see that aggregate margins and returns have been relatively stable,
though with a slight upward drift over time.
11.4% 11.9%
12.8%
1996-2000 2001-2010 2011-2017
EBIT Margin
17.2% 17.6% 17.9%
1996-2000 2001-2010 2011-2017
Rate of Return (EBIT/D+E)
Figure 65—Margins and Returns Drifting Higher
Some may look at these last two figures and say that managements
have been prudent to curtail investment and to emphasize margins
and returns. Unfortunately, it hasn’t worked out that way for investors.
The S&P 5003 delivered average annualized returns of 18% from
1996 through 2000, and since then we have realized a paltry 6% per
year through the end of 2017.
Indeed, the idea that investing in growth would automatically
drive down returns on capital doesn’t always hold. Consider the retail
industry. In January 2012, my then-partner Steve Treadwell and I
published an article4 on CFO.com about the capital deployment practices,
financial performance, and shareholder returns of more than 100
companies in the retail sector over the prior few years. We evaluated
the influence on TSR of sales growth, profitability, return on capital,
reinvestment rates, and distribution policies.
We found, as some might expect, that the best returns for shareholders
were delivered by the companies that grew their sales the
most. These successful companies tended to achieve their higher
sales growth by reinvesting a greater percentage of the cash flow
they generated back into the business to fund capital expenditures,
working capital, new lease obligations, and acquisitions.
Interestingly, these higher-reinvestment, high-growth companies
also tended to deliver higher cash-on-cash returns on capital, which
seems at odds with the common wisdom that holds that investing
in growth tends to come at the expense of delivering high returns
on capital. How is it that the very same companies that deliver the
highest growth through heavy investment also exhibit the highest
rates of return? Admittedly, some retail brands have been so well
managed that strong demand is actively driving the sales growth,
and so the investment is facilitating the growth more than causing
it. Yet even these strong brands would not be able to grow as they do
without the investments. The main point, really, is that it’s not always
a tradeoff between growth and return—sometimes you can achieve
both simultaneously.
Perhaps we need to reflect again on the confidence and belief
displayed by the victorious Giants, the Red Sox, and the Reds of
Liverpool. Their managers, coaches, and players believed they could
win against all odds—and they expressed it in both word and action.
As corporate leaders, executives must similarly inspire their teams to
excel, though this can be difficult when executives are too focused on
maximizing percentage measures of margins and returns by cutting
costs, slashing investment, and, in many cases, minimizing risk-taking.
Most middle managers and rank-and-file employees become
discouraged in an organization that is preoccupied with cost and capital
minimization, and discouraged employees don’t perform any better
than discouraged athletes. When seeking to maximize shareholder
value, then, we must encourage as much investment in the business as
possible while holding managers accountable for delivering adequate
returns on those investments. To this end, embracing an ownership
culture can stir managers and employees alike out of complacency
and make them more accountable.
The Value of an Ownership Culture
Sam Walton famously said, “There is only one boss: the customer. And
he can fire everybody in the company from the chairman on down,
simply by spending his money somewhere else.”5 Owners like Walton,
who founded Walmart, think differently than others because they take
responsibility. Their success isn’t based on how well they can negotiate
their objectives or whether they can explain away performance variances
as “not my fault.” If a business opportunity falls through, there
is no one to blame other than the person in the mirror. And missed
opportunities are quickly backfilled by new opportunities, since no
one is going to get the business back on track other than that same
person staring back in the mirror.
In an ownership culture,6 managers up and down the organization
ranks own their decisions, results, and consequences. When
all managers and employees accept their business responsibilities
as if they owned them, the collective organization delivers greater
success. In addition to their own sphere of influence, employees
should see colleagues as partners whose mutual success or failure
depends on how effectively they jointly serve the customer. There
may be a managing partner (aka the CEO) who leads the group, but
an ownership culture means that each employee wants to improve
the customer experience and the company performance. Responsibility
and accountability often become diluted below the executive
level—especially as a company grows big, complex, and bureaucratic,
and particularly if accountability and rewards are decoupled from
individual performance. In an ownership culture, employees take
more pride in their work and have greater reason to value opportunities
to prove themselves.
An ownership culture doesn’t require risking one’s life savings like
an actual entrepreneur, but it does require that results be prioritized
and that they determine rewards. My partners and I have identified
the five most-distinguishing owner-like traits, and each is within reach
in every company.
1. Spending Like the Money Is Yours: As we learned from the noted
economist Milton Friedman, people tend to spend more than necessary
when they are using other people’s money. Whether it’s a dinner
at a nicer restaurant, an upgraded airline seat, or some other item or
service being expensed, managers and employees often don’t treat
the company’s money as they would their own. Owners rarely feel
shy about spending their money, and often they are more than eager
to invest in growth, happier employees, and higher-quality products.
But most won’t waste money on anything that doesn’t deliver
a tangible benefit.
Many companies lack the results-oriented and accountabilityminded
approach required to reinforce an ownership culture. As
discussed extensively in chapter 6, negotiated performance targets
can insulate rewards from performance improvements. Is the business
underperforming? Is there a problem with excess spending? It often
doesn’t matter, since managers in most companies can still be paid
well if they’re able to negotiate a sandbagged target.
As mentioned in other chapters, one solution can be to measure
performance improvements versus the prior year, rather than against
a budget. This requires a comprehensive measure of performance
that balances revenue growth, cost efficiency, and capital productivity;
and this is where Residual Cash Earnings (RCE) once again comes in
handy. When RCE improvements determine compensation, managers
are encouraged to treat the company’s money like their own. If
they spend wastefully, RCE will decline and the value destruction
will be reflected in their compensation—and they won’t be able to
negotiate around it this time! If they generate wealth, by both investing
in profitable growth and removing inefficiencies, they will get a
definitive share of that, too.
2. Adopting Extreme Prioritization: One of the more common
complaints of public company executives is that they have too little
time to accomplish everything that needs to get done. Indeed, we’ve
all been told, “sorry, but he’s been bouncing from meeting to meeting
all week.” In such situations, prioritization is not enough, for there
are simply too many initiatives and projects.
Successful owner-managers often practice extreme prioritization
to make absolutely sure that all value-creating projects and practices
take off, while not being distracted by mediocre, lower-return ideas
and tasks. They recognize that 80% of potential success typically
comes from 20% of the activities, as we’ve discussed, so they give these
fruitful opportunities their full attention. With the lesser opportunities
screened out or delegated, the executive team’s full attention and
resources can be applied to their most productive uses.
An intensive and comprehensive prioritization of opportunities
should be based on a fact-based strategic resource allocation process,
as discussed in chapter 9. Capital, marketing, and R&D should be
concentrated where desirable improvement and trends in RCE appear
sustainable and expandable. Of course, you should spend where it’s
important for the well-being of your organization and to meet regulations,
but stop wasting resources on activities with mediocre returns.
One way to reinforce prioritization is to create an “agenda” of
important issues facing the company. This starts with the CEO, who
has created an agenda for the entire company, and cascades down
the organization. Two key criteria for such agendas are the “valueat-
stake,” or how much value hinges on the matter’s being resolved
successfully, and the level of urgency—when a decision needs to be
made. Extreme prioritization requires selecting the five to 10 issues
with the highest values-at-stake and urgency, then devising a disciplined,
fact-based process to resolve each one.
3. Embracing a Willingness to Fail: Company leaders often appear
more concerned about avoiding consequences than ensuring the very
best outcomes. This “loss aversion” tends to prioritize incremental
improvements over what a company already does, while placing less
emphasis on bold things the company could do. Efficiency and productivity
metrics typically improve things, which benefits the quarter, but
less innovation and growth restrict long-term value creation.
The same owner-managers who ruthlessly prioritize resource
allocations are often willing to experiment and fail. But when they
fail, they take care to fail fast, limit the damage done, and learn from
it. The willingness to fund new good ideas helped make Silicon Valley
successful but, as discussed earlier, the ability to swiftly defund bad
ideas is potentially every bit as important.
A willingness to experiment and accept failure is necessary to
create the fresh and differentiated products and services that fuel longterm
growth. However, leaders must set expectations up front, so that
their managers and employees have a clear sense of what success and
failure look like, and how to react when the latter shows up.
4. Doing More and Talking Less: Making decisions can be really
uncomfortable. “What if it goes wrong?... What if I am blamed?...
What if there is information I should have had when making this
decision?... This could be bad for my career, so let’s study it more to
be sure before we make a decision.” We can never know everything
about anything, so we have to make judgments even when faced with
uncertainty and accept that we can’t eliminate all risks.
Obviously, owners don’t want to be wrong. But they know that
investing $10 million in something worth $12 million creates $2
million of wealth; but spending $3 million studying it before investing
consumes more than 100% of the value creation. That’s why
owners are decisive. They do carefully evaluate decisions, but there
is no analysis paralysis because they care about results, not covering
their butts.
Results-oriented managers spend more time doing things and
less time talking about them. They consider the pros and cons of a
situation and then act decisively. Before they present an idea to others,
they convince themselves that they believe it will work. And if they
are presented with an idea, they have more confidence in what is
presented when they know the presenter is personally, and absolutely,
accountable for the result.
5. Remembering that It’s About the Long and the Short Term:
It’s unfortunate that many public company executives act as if next
quarter’s results are the goal. As first mentioned in chapter 1, John
Graham of Duke University and his colleagues showed in 2005 that
over three-fourths of businesses would knowingly sacrifice shareholder
value to report earnings that rise smoothly year to year.7 This logic is
nauseating, and the behavior seems to have gotten even worse since
then. There is a saying in sports that “You can’t win them all, unless
you win the first one.”8 As inspiring as that may sound, it’s still terrible
business advice.
At the other end of the spectrum, some executives advocate taking
only a long-term strategic viewpoint. Sure, they can be commended
for avoiding the typical short-termism, but often this comes at the
expense of important near-term considerations. This further exacerbates
the common hockey-stick forecast that shows a decline in the
short run—but, if you believe the numbers, the future’s so bright we’ll
have to wear shades. With insufficient focus on shorter-term results,
the bright future we anticipated gives way to clouds far too often.
The strategic first priority of owner-managers is always long-term
value. They pursue all investments that drive long-term growth and
return higher, and they want to drive current-year performance, too.
They wouldn’t cut investments in advertising or R&D to meet shortterm
EPS objectives, but they continue to motivate the sales team to
sell, the manufacturing team to stay productive, and everyone else
to work as efficiently as possible. Thus, they seek profitable growth
in the near term to pay for the long-term investments. It’s not about
the short term or the long term—it has to be about both.
Embracing an Ownership Culture
Public company executives and managers get most of their compensation
either as fixed payments (salaries) that don’t vary with performance,
or from cash and equity-based rewards that are loosely related
to share performance. So how can we get the employees in the lower
ranks to act like owners? Even in privately owned companies, most
executives and managers are not owners. This conundrum becomes
especially important as private companies grow and as a greater
percentage of their executive teams is composed of non-owners.
This brings us back to our recommended performance measure:
RCE. Unlike traditional return on capital, economic profit, and
economic value added measures, Residual Cash Earnings spreads the
benefits of investments over time, which in turn encourages greater
investment in the future while holding managers accountable for
returns on investments over time. In other words, it encourages managers
to meet short-term demands without cutting into long-term results.
It is also of unmistakable importance that companies apply a
consistent framework to make high-level decisions regarding strategy,
resource allocation, and investments. RCE provides this comprehensive
framework and allows the comparison of seemingly incongruous
alternatives in a way that other measures are simply not designed to
do. By measuring resource allocation, investment alternatives, and
performance through this common denominator, RCE provides a
reliable map of potential and actual value creation across a company,
and even within business units and down to product lines. All this
makes it easy for managers at every level to make the right decisions.
And when companies hold managers accountable for improvements
in RCE, they ensure that these managers believe their own forecasts,
thereby internalizing the ownership culture. If RCE declines, they
make less; and if it rises, they make more. Period! It is a true simulation
of ownership.
To embrace such a culture requires extensive communication and
training about how these principles should translate into behaviors
and actions. It is most effective to avoid a green-eyeshade accounting
training style and instead use case-based training that simulates real
decision-making, so that employees can see how their plans, actions,
and results translate into success (or failure) for the company and
themselves.
Executive buy-in is critical. If senior managers talk the talk but
do not walk the walk, the culture will fail. Managers and employees
must witness the senior executives treating the company’s capital
as their own, prioritizing initiatives, experimenting with innovative
ideas, emphasizing results over variances from forecasts and plans,
and balancing the long- and short-term. And senior executives must
be seen taking concepts like “competitive advantage” and “strategy,”
which are often mere platitudes, and make them points of emphasis
and action every day. After all, competitive advantage is the most
significant driver of RCE improvements.
We must also ensure that we have an organizational structure that
lends itself to clear, insightful analysis. Most structures are inherently
political, so they’re structured around people, or a “political map.” This
can be important, but more important is envisioning an “economic
map” that plots where value is, and has the potential to be, created
in the company. “Value Centers” that are relatively independent units
should be tracked, each with a fully loaded income statement and a
balance sheet. And every value center should be led by an executive
who runs the business in ways that accountability and responsibility
for RCE are crystal clear. All this makes it much easier and more
efficient for the CEO to delegate decision authority.
To reinforce the business management processes and all the training
and communication, properly designed compensation can provide
owner-like upside opportunity as well as downside accountability. Why
make managers choose between what’s good for the company and
what’s good for themselves and their family? Companies that embrace
an ownership culture develop better strategies, improve execution,
and deliver more profit and cash flow. And this all culminates in higher
total shareholder return, greater compensation, and more-secure
jobs. Like most things worth doing, embracing an ownership culture
requires considerable effort. Yet it provides defensible competitive
advantages that are difficult to replicate.
Notes
1 Tom Bloomfield, “66/1 Liverpool Win 4–0 and Reach the Champions League
Final,” Oddschecker.com, May 7, 2019, accessed June 27, 2019, https://www.
oddschecker.com/insight/football/20190507-66-1-liverpool-win-4-0-and-reachthe-
champions-league-final.
2 “Roberto Goizueta Quotes,” Goodreads, accessed January 15, 2019. https://
www.goodreads.com/author/quotes/3948921.Roberto_Goizueta.
3 Returns for the S&P 500 were approximated based on total returns, including
dividends, for the Standard & Poor’s Depositary Receipts S&P 500 Trust Exchange-
Traded Fund, or ETF, which is designed as an investable product that tracks the
S&P 500 and trades under the ticker symbol “SPY.”
4 Gregory V. Milano and Steven C. Treadwell, “Growing Retailers Spark High
Returns,” CFO.com, January 6, 2012, accessed January 15, 2019, http://ww2.
cfo.com/budgeting/2012/01/growing-retailers-spark-high-returns/.
5 Sam Walton, Made in America: My Story (New York: Bantam Books, 1993).
6 Adapted from “Embracing an Ownership Culture,” FEI, April 12, 2018, accessed
January 15, 2019, https://www.financialexecutives.org/FEI-Daily/April-2018/
Embracing-an-Ownership-Culture.aspx.
7 John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, and Shiva Rajgopal, “The Economic
Implications of Corporate Financial Reporting,” Working paper, Duke University,
January 11, 2005, https://faculty.fuqua.duke.edu/~charvey/Research/Working_
Papers/W73_The_economic_implications.pdf.
8 While this quotation has been nebulously attributed to many, the original speaker
remains unclear. In my mind, I imagine the great Joe Namath speaking it.