WHEN GOLDILOCKS TESTED the beds of the Three Bears,
she found Papa Bear’s bed to be too firm, Momma Bear’s bed to be too
soft, and Baby Bear’s bed to be just right. So it is with the propensity
to invest exhibited by different companies. Some companies invest
too much and make several value-destroying investments; some don’t
invest enough and miss a number of value-creating investments; and
some get it just right by accepting all value-creating investments and
turning down all value-destroying ones.
In principle, this may seem obvious. But certain companies put
such an emphasis on the quantity of growth that managements at times
will pursue investments that grow the revenue line of the company
without delivering enough cash to sustain worthwhile profits. This
was common a few decades ago. But since then, more emphasis
has been placed on delivering profit margins and returns on capital.
These companies that emphasize the quality of growth, as measured
by margins and returns, often experience a stagnated growth profile
because their executives have become so conservative that they pass
on many investments that would create value and instead prioritize
only the cream of the crop. Investing too much and investing too little
are, of course, both suboptimal strategies. Like Goldilocks, we want
our investment strategies to be just right.
Consider a company that makes too many investments and, on
top of all its good investments, management includes an investment
of $25 million with a net present value of negative $10 million. This
company has decreased its value creation by $10 million. Another
company acts very conservatively to avoid precisely such a bad invest206
ment outcome. But perhaps it’s too conservative, which leads it to
also leave out a few value-adding investments that collectively would
have added $10 million of net present value. Just like the overinvesting
company, this underinvesting company has underdelivered on its value
creation potential by $10 million. In a sense, forgoing the opportunity
to make an investment that would have created $10 million of net
present value destroys as much value as pursuing the opportunities
that wipe out $10 million of value.
What motivates some companies to make too many investments,
while others make too few? It all comes down to the behaviors that are
encouraged by the culture, the management processes in place, and
the incentives available. Is the culture aggressive and entrepreneurial,
or is it careful and conservative? Are growth rates emphasized more
in operating reviews, or is the emphasis on percentage margins and
rates of return on capital? And, importantly, what drives the incentive
plan—how is performance being measured?
Historically, back in the 1970s and early 1980s, companies
commonly overemphasized growth and economies of scale. This
led to a “growth at any cost” mindset and, though some companies
managed to grow in a profitable fashion, many did not. One client’s
CEO told us in the early 1990s that he felt that he had “fallen behind,”
because one of his former colleagues who became CEO of a public
company around the same time had grown revenue nearly twice as
much as he had. We sought to convince him that his counterpart had,
in fact, likely destroyed substantial value. Still, it was clear that growth
and sheer size were extremely important to our client.
Twenty-five years later, many companies still would benefit from
shifting their focus to growing profits, not merely revenue. Yet in
the intervening decades, many management teams have adopted
more discipline about increasing or maintaining margins and rates of
return. Unfortunately, the pendulum has swung too far in countless
cases, and many companies are now so focused on maximizing rates
of return that they have refused to consider all but the very highestreturn
investments.
Why has the pendulum swung too far? At least in many cases,
the emphasis on holding managers accountable for delivering high
and improving rates of return has stifled investments in the best
businesses where growth is the most valuable. The answer is not to
ignore rates of return, but instead to use a measurement and investment
analysis framework that does a better job of motivating good
investment, while at the same time holding management accountable
for delivering a sufficient return.
As discussed extensively in chapter 3, the cash-flow-based economic
profit measure known as Residual Cash Earnings (RCE) does a better
job than other measures at spreading the recognition of value over
the life of the investment. Most traditional measures of rate of return
and economic profit show front-load costs and reflect most of the
benefits later in the asset’s life—at a time when it’s mostly depreciated!
With these types of measures, even a reasonable forecast often
looks like a hockey stock.
As an example, consider a retail business that over decades has
successfully opened some 1,000 stores that have been quite profitable.
The enterprise value of the business is at a 25% premium to its asset
value. The chain invested in attractive local markets and achieved a
competitive advantage in merchandise selection and customer service,
including a thriving e-commerce platform. Management is confident
that it can identity perhaps another 150 locations that will duplicate
the advantages of the existing stores, so it develops a plan to open
these stores over the next three years. From a strategic standpoint,
the expansion looks like a clear winner, though management needs
to confirm this by evaluating the profitability of the growth strategy.
Let’s assume the average capital commitment per store is $2
million. In total, the company will invest $100 million of capital expenditures
per year, and, for simplicity, we assume that the company forecasts
that the revenue run rate will be flat after each store is opened.
Once all the stores are open, they are expected to deliver $300 million
in new revenue with a 20% EBITDA margin, to have a 21% corporate
tax rate, and to use net working capital (mostly inventory) equal to
25% of annual sales. All investments have a 10-year depreciation life,
and the operations are expected to continue for two years after the
assets fully depreciate on the accounting books, with no terminal
value in the net present value calculation.
The net present value of free cash flow for this investment program
is quite positive, equaling 24% of the peak investment of free cash
flow. So, by most measures, these are truly desirable investments. It’s
like investing $100 each year in order to buy something worth $124.
But the cumulative free cash flow breakeven point does not occur
until year nine, as shown in figure 49, which may serve as a deterrent
to management’s pursuing the investment program.
(400)
(300)
(200)
(100)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Cumulative Free Cash Flow ($ millions)
Figure 49—Cumulative Free Cash Flow from Three-Year Expansion
On an annual basis, free cash flow doesn’t turn positive until year
four, as shown in figure 50. This is really not a problem, but these days
many investors, analysts, and journalists often misuse the concept
of “free cash flow,” treating it as a suitable period measure when it
clearly should not be. Some even talk about free cash flow yield, as
if that were a meaningful measure. The lower a company’s growth
prospects, the lower the valuation multiple; and the less it invests,
the higher the free cash flow. So, this maxim goes, if you don’t invest
and therefore you don’t grow, you can achieve a high free cash flow
yield (high free cash flow divided by a low share price).1 It’s hard to
think of a measure with more potential for misleading investors! The
point is that if a company is determined to tell its investors that it
is improving annual free cash flow, this investment would definitely
be shelved, since it would reduce annual free cash flow for three full
years and cumulative free cash flow for nine years. Figure 50 shows
the annual cash flows from this three-year investment program.
(150)
(100)
(50)
0
50
100
150
200
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Annual Free Cash Flow ($ millions)
Annual Free Cash Flow
Figure 50—Annual Free Cash Flow from Three-Year Expansion
In fairness, far more companies examine the rate of return
on the invested capital profile for new investments than they
consider free cash flow profiles. And this is good, since rate-ofreturn
measures are designed to indicate capital productivity
by dividing a measure of current profits (or cash flow) by the
cumulative amount of net (or gross) investment that is used to
deliver those profits (or cash flow). This is a proper comparison,
but in the three-year new store investment case we have been
examining, the rate of return on invested capital does not rise
above the 8% cost of capital until year five, when the return on
invested capital reaches 8.8%. So, if management seeks to deliver
returns above the cost of capital, they have to wait for the results.
This is viewed as a long-term investment that takes time to pay
off. And this is so, despite the simplifying assumption that each
store delivers full run-rate revenue in year one of the investment.
In reality, the revenues may ramp up more gradually and the rate
of return may not exceed the cost of capital until much later in
the duration of this investment program. Figure 51 shows the
rate-of-return profile.
8.8%
31.6%
43.9%
52.7%
52.7%
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Return on Invested Capital vs. Cost of Capital
Return on Invested Capital Cost of Capital
Figure 51—ROIC from Three-Year Expansion
In addition to the delay in achieving a rate of return on capital
above the cost of capital until year five, the rapidly depreciating
asset base provides its own bias, and the returns keep increasing
aggressively after surpassing the cost of capital and are above 30%
for the final four years of the forecast. Note, too, that the revenue
and EBITDA in this example are absolutely flat from year three
through year 12, and yet the depreciating asset base drives rising
returns that give the illusion of tremendous ongoing value creation
in those years. With any kind of ongoing EBITDA growth, even
from inflation, this artificial upward drift in rates of return would
become far more dramatic. It is easy, then, to see how a rate-of-return
focus using traditional rates of return can encourage managers to
(1) milk old, depreciated assets since the returns look great and (2)
avoid making new investments, because it takes so long for them
to drive returns above the cost of capital.
This conventional accounting treatment is a big reason that many
companies are underinvesting. Management teams are right to care
about earning adequate returns on capital but are using an approach
that makes new investments look bad and old investments look good,
which leads to demonstrably lower investment.
In one extreme case, a large consumer products company seemed
to be underinvesting in its businesses with the highest rates of return
on capital. When prodded to consider allocating more to these businesses,
executives said they would “love to,” but the business-unit
management had been unable to identify any additional desirable
investments. That was attributed to a lack of market growth coupled
with a reasonably high market share, though other business units
in similar situations were able to find desirable investments in brand
extensions and permutations. Further discussions uncovered the real
problem: The business-unit management teams were paid incentives
based on the percentage improvement in return on capital.
In some businesses, the existing return was 3% or 4%, so finding
investments that earned a higher return, and would therefore bring
up the average, was relatively easy. But for the very highest-return
businesses, which were earning cash-on-cash rates of return of
30% to 50%, it was harder to find new investments earning returns
above the current return. And any investments earning less than
the current return would result in lower bonuses for management,
since they would drag down the average return. The emphasis on
rates of return seemed careful and wise—yet it led to substantially
less-than-optimal investment in the best businesses. And in an odd
paradox, one part of the business was encouraged and financially
rewarded for investing in projects earning 6%, while others were
discouraged and financially penalized for investing in projects earning
30% (five times the return!).
EVA, as well as all traditional economic profit measures, in
fact, was intended to improve the balance of growth and return
by determining the dollars of profit above a minimum acceptable
return, or capital charge, on the investment base. Though this is
better, EVA suffers from the same depreciation distortion as traditional
return on capital; it takes five years for EVA to turn positive
in our example, as shown in figure 52.
Much like return on capital, the strong EVA doesn’t show up
until the assets are more than halfway depreciated—again reinforcing
the milking of old assets and underinvestment in new assets.
EVA is better than a percentage return on capital measure, but it
is still flawed.
$2.1
($5.0)
$0.0
$5.0
$10.0
$15.0
$20.0
$25.0
$30.0
$35.0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Annual EVA ($ millions)
Figure 52—EVA from Three-Year Expansion
Some may wonder, “Why the heavy emphasis on how long it takes
the results to show up?” If we are telling managers to think long-term,
shouldn’t NPV settle the question? Simply take all positive-NPV projects
and reject all that are negative. Unfortunately, we live in a world where
there are annual performance measures, and even quarterly metrics
matter a whole lot to managers. Therefore, finding a measure that
provides a similar NPV signal but that spreads the benefits out more
evenly over the life of an asset will encourage more good investment,
since managers won’t have to wait for results due to depreciation distortions
while still they’re being held accountable for delivering returns.
Residual Cash Earnings properly balances growth, margin, and
asset intensity while also spreading the benefits over the life of the
investment, as figure 53 demonstrates.
Through the RCE lens, the results appear desirable sooner and are
spread out more evenly over the life of the investment. We won’t get
to incentive design until chapter 14, but it’s easy to see that if we pay
managers to improve performance compared to the prior year, then
measures such as free-cash-flow, rate-of-return, and EVA would likely
lead to this investment proposal’s being turned down. RCE, however,
encourages such investment.
$14.7
$0.0
$5.0
$10.0
$15.0
$20.0
$25.0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Annual RCE ($ millions)
Figure 53—RCE for Three-Year Expansion
In the context of this chapter, the important point of all this is
that the primary analytical framework for investment evaluation
and approval should be the very same RCE framework that is best
for evaluating the ongoing performance of the overall business.
Much like when using discounted cash flow analysis, a forecast is
prepared; from it we calculate Gross Cash Earnings, Gross Operating
Assets, and RCE year by year. Then we calculate the net present
value of the forecasted RCE. Because of the way RCE works,
these NPVs tend to be a bit higher than traditional NPV, which
in practice means that managers don’t need to create unrealistic
hockey-stick forecasts to get their projects approved.
In addition to applying RCE to individual investments,
managements require a methodology for comparing investments,
prioritizing them, and ultimately making investment
decisions. As mentioned before, corporate finance theory states
that companies maximize value when they accept all projects with
a positive NPV. But, in practice, managements should establish
minimum criteria for what is “enough NPV to be worth it.” This
can be established based on an RCE Profitability Index (RPI),
which is simply the NPV of RCE as a percentage of the peak
investment, or in other words the amount of value created per
dollar of investment. Using such an index, projects can then be
ranked and prioritized based on this profitability index. This
way, the portfolio of investments selected for implementation
will maximize the value-creation potential, given the size of the
total investment budget. If other limitations are in play, such as
having a minimal number of project managers for implementing
investments, the best NPV strategy will be the one that delivers
the most NPV while fitting within the constraint.
The typical approach to prioritizing investments is to use the
internal rate of return, or IRR, but four major flaws affect this
approach. The first is that, if a project has cash flows that flip direction
more than once, there will be multiple IRR solutions. Which
one do you use? The marketing team likely emphasizes the higher
IRR, while the finance folks care about the lower IRR. The second
flaw is that projects with different durations can have the same IRR
and yet very different net present values, which can lead to poor
prioritizations and underperformance. Third, IRR also assumes
that cash in-flows are reinvested at the IRR, while NPV doesn’t.
Finally, IRR doesn’t indicate the dollars of value creation, whereas
NPV does. This is important when thinking about prioritization
under constraints, such as a limited number of managers or a fixed
capital budget, because only NPV can be used to optimize value
optimization.
The project duration limitation on IRR came into play recently
when the CEO of an oil and gas exploration and production
company was considering rates of return from wells with varying
reserve lives and production capacities. In some regions, the annual
returns were high, but the reserves didn’t last very long—sometimes
only two to three years before production faded. In other
areas, natural geological formation created reserves that produced
at a slower rate, but for a longer period. So, the peak returns in
these reserves were not as high, but they lasted much longer. The
IRR framework is particularly poor at properly comparing these
different investment options. Instead, we recommend using the
RPI, which indicates the amount of value created, per dollar of
investment, regardless of the combination of IRR and duration
expected, and can therefore be better used for prioritization.
The RPI is a highly intuitive metric. For just a moment, forget
everything but three pieces of information about an investment.
We know the expected NPV, the amount of investment, and the
ratio of the two (which is the RPI percentage). Consider an investment
of $50 million with an NPV of $25 million—the RPI is 50%.
Essentially you are paying $50 million to buy something worth
$75 million, giving you a net profit, or net present value, of $25
million. Let’s imagine this is an acquisition and these numbers are
based on your review of the company before any discussions. Let’s
assume we need to pay a 20% premium to get the deal closed. Now
the purchase price rises to $60 million, the NPV is $15 million, and
the RPI drops from 50% to 25%. Half the benefit is gone.
Let’s further assume that, after discussions begin—and then
become public through the loose-lipped investment banker you
mistakenly chose to use—other potential buyers show up. After
some public bidding, the market price rises to $68.2 million, and
it looks like the RPI will be 10% ($6.8 million divided by $68.2
million). We are rapidly losing ground as the purchase price rises
and the value received stays the same. In many deals this is where
the buyer “finds new synergies” to somehow convince itself the
value is over $75 million. Lesson learned: Try to avoid justifying
higher prices by changing the numbers that drive your estimate of
the value you are getting. Except in rare cases, people do this to
make themselves feel better. Most often, they feel much worse later.
Now, say the deal arouses the interest of a few private equity
firms that realize the target company is in play and can support a
lot of debt, so they make a bid. You stick with your plan and are
determined to buy this company. After all, you told your board
it’s “strategic.” A few rounds of posturing and bidding go by, and
the price reaches $71.4 million. It continues to rise, and ultimately
you pay $73.5 million, which makes for a 2% RPI. Of the initial $25
million of NPV, 94% of it was yielded to the selling shareholders
during negotiations.
This could still turn out to be a good deal, but after the acquisition
closes and you begin to integrate, you would have a fairly
small margin of safety before the NPV drops to zero and then turns
negative. If, in the end, the synergies are a bit less than expected
and additional investment is needed to achieve them, the value you
get could be much less than the originally estimated $75 million.
Let’s assume it is only $70 million. Unfortunately, you paid $73.5
million, so the negative NPV of $3.5 million results in an RPI of
–4.8%. Bottom line: It’s worth less than what you paid.
Note that, if the deal went through at the original $60 million,
which was a 20% premium to what the company traded for before
any deal discussions, there would have been enough margin of
safety to more than absorb the unexpected synergy shortfall. The
positive NPV would have been $10 million ($70 million minus $60
million), which, when divided by $60 million, would result in an
RPI of 16.7%. Despite all the due diligence we may do, we can
never know for sure what will happen both inside the company we
acquire and across the industry and the economy. We are always
better off with a greater margin of safety, which, fortunately for
us, can be quantified by the RPI.
The most interesting and useful applications of the RPI become
evident when we apply it to a portfolio of investments as a means
of prioritizing them and making strategic choices. This could have
been done in real time for each of the negotiation rounds in the
deal above. As things unfolded, where did the acquisition stack
up? This process can provide managers with a good, continuous
feel for their “opportunity set,” which can help them know when
to walk away and when to come back to the table.
At the start of the planning process, a company or business
unit should evaluate major potential investments to come up with
a high-level RCE and RPI analysis. Then these investments can
be prioritized from highest to lowest RPI. In figure 54, we show
a group of 12 investments prioritized by RPI. The first seven are
shaded darker, indicating they have an RPI with a desirable margin
of safety. The next three are shaded lighter since, though they
have a positive expected NPV, it’s not high enough to provide an
adequate margin of safety against unexpected differences between
the projection and the actual results. Put more simply, these investments
aren’t expected to deliver enough NPV to be worth the
effort and risk.
The final two investments have negative NPV. Whereas we
might be willing to make an investment with a slim RPI if it’s
strategic, we should always avoid negative-NPV investments.
RCE Profitability Index (RPI)
Investment
Good investments with RPI above the
minimum Margin of Safety
Positive NPV, but below
the Margin of Safety
Negative
NPV
Figure 54—Project Prioritization with the RCE Profitability Index
Project Look-Backs
Most companies lack a rigorous process for evaluating how their
investments turned out after the fact, and those that do usually fail
to apply it very consistently or effectively. To have an effective lookback
process requires work at the time of the original investment
evaluation. Before giving a go-ahead to authorize capital spending,
the project managers should be required to establish how often and
how a look-back will be done to validate the effectiveness of the
investment. Measurable financial and nonfinancial criteria, including
specific metrics, data items, and minimum acceptable readings, should
all be established in advance to ensure that the data is captured and
reviewed as needed. Deciding to do a look-back two years after the
investment takes more effort, time, and cost than making it part of
the process from the start.
Since many companies develop discounted free cash flow models
of net present value at the time of the investment, this is often the
financial basis for a look-back. But beware—this approach can confuse
good and bad progress by mixing investment and operating cash flows.
Consider the cumulative free cash flow graph in figure 55. From a
cumulative free cash flow perspective, this look-back seems to be better
than was projected, since we are ahead of where we were expected
to be. Unfortunately, this is not because the investments are turning
out better than expected; it’s because the investment results showed
lower revenue, revealed thinner margins, and were altogether so bad
that the investment program was discontinued after only 40% of the
capital had been invested. What we see here is a shortfall of investment,
not a surplus of profits. We could construct another case that looks
exactly like this, where all the investment happened but the profits
were way higher than expected. From the cumulative or annual free
cash flow alone, we can’t tell if this is a good or bad outcome.
Cumulative Free Cash Flow
Time
Actual
Original
Forecast
+
-
Figure 55—Project Look-Back Cumulative Free Cash Flow
Since RCE always compares the actual Gross Cash Earnings during
a given period to the capital charge on the actual cumulative investment
in Gross Operating Assets, there are no mixed messages. If RCE
is higher, the investment project is doing better than planned, and
vice versa. Figure 56 clearly shows that this look-back is for a project
that is simply not good, which we would expect with lower revenue,
tighter margins, and a discontinuation of the investment program
after only 40% of the capital had been spent.
The frequency and nature of look-backs tend to have an important
impact on both the propensity to invest and the accountability after
the investment. Companies that rarely do look-backs—or do them
with a process that is fragmented, ad hoc, or inconclusive—often
consider capital to be free and thus can be inadvertently supporting
a culture of overinvestment. To avoid this, many managements
clamp down on the investment budget at the center, which can shift
the pendulum too far toward underinvestment. In addition, when
the process is governed by control rather than economics, midlevel
managers won’t feel accountable, and as a result it’s more likely that
investments won’t be prioritized where they can do the most good
but instead will be focused on the proverbial squeaky wheel.
Residual Cash Earnings (RCE)
Forecast Actual
Figure 56—Project Look-Back RCE
Look-backs can also be used to improve capabilities and recalibrate
forecasts by analyzing and adjusting the assumptions that were originally
made in projections. For example, did customers and competitors
respond as we initially expected them to? In any case, be wary of
focusing too much on differences between the forecast and the actual
results. Some companies spend far too much time and money analyzing
these variances to an updated forecast, as if they really mattered.
One of the worst comments ever uttered in my presence, and my good
friend John Ballow remembers it well, was “That was very profitable
after the write-off.”
Of most importance, though, is whether the investment in fact
created value. If a project’s RCE contribution is positive, that’s good.
If it’s large and positive, that’s even better. If after three years we
calculate that project A has delivered cumulative RCE of $125 million
but was originally projected to deliver $150 million, I might discuss
the reasons why it fell short of the original forecast. Still, I’m going to
be much happier with project A than with project B, which employed
a similar amount of investment but produced only $25 million in
RCE, even if that’s way ahead of the $15 million that was originally
planned for project B. Results matter—not variances.
Two important behavioral problems can arise from emphasizing
variances rather than focusing on absolute RCE. First, too much
focus on variances can lead people to sandbag their forecasts to be
barely above the allowable margin of safety, so that they get their
project approved and their performance looks better when the results
come in. This degrades the information available to those making
investment decisions. Second, criticizing the managers responsible
for project A may cause them to think twice before proposing more
high-RCE investments, and this may inadvertently prod those with
the best investment opportunities to reduce their reinvestment rate.
Notes
1 In some cases, the definition of “free cash flow” is adjusted to only subtract
ongoing and maintenance investments, and not to charge growth investments
against the free cash flow measure. This makes the measure less bad, but it still
is a poor period measure.