IF AN INTERVIEWER were to ask LeBron James how he expected
his team to do before a game, he wouldn’t hedge and say, “We’re
probably going to lose” just to impress everyone if they happen to
win. With his average of 27.5 points per game in the 2017–18 season,
he would have been unlikely to say, “I hope to score at least 6 to 8
points tonight,” seeking praise even if he scores just 15. People who
follow sports have an absolutist mentality—“they won” or “they lost.”
Over a full season, it’s “they were champions”—or they weren’t. Of
course, some teams have better chances than others, but few athletes
plan for mediocrity. Even those teams that are expected to finish last
in their division aim to improve on their situation.
The 2015–16 Premier League soccer season was an excellent case
in point. But before we get to that, consider that European sports don’t
have all the competition levelers we have in the United States. They
lack salary caps and significant revenue sharing. They don’t conduct
drafts that reward the worst teams with the best draft picks, as we
do here in America. Europe’s best teams have the most success; they
attract the most fans; they make the most money; and they can afford
the best players. It’s capitalism. If you listened to U.S. sports-league
executives, you would think the only way to have commercial success
is to install competitive parity. Every time a team gets an edge, these
executives believe they need to remove it by setting salary caps or
rewarding failure with better draft picks and other subsidies. European
football is a talent-concentrated sport with only a few teams that have
a real chance of being named champion in each league in a given year.
According to Total Sportek’s international sport popularity ranking,
which is based on 13 well-thought-out factors, soccer is the most
popular sport in the world. Its fan base of over 4 billion people is far
ahead of the 1 billion fans of the next most popular sport, basketball.
Baseball and American football rank 11 and 12, respectively, on the
list of the top 25 international sports. Maybe ensuring competitive
parity isn’t that important to fans.
Against this backdrop, the achievements of Leicester City Football
Club are remarkable. In the summer of 2015, the betting odds for
Leicester to win the Premier League were 5,000 to 1—and rightfully
so. It seemed they had no chance. In England, the lowest three teams
in each league are “relegated”—that is, forced to trade places with the
top three teams from the league below. What an awesome concept!
If you underperform, you are demoted—as opposed to what happens
in the United States, where we shower the worst teams with top draft
picks and revenue sharing. It’s as if we were trying to find ways to
reward failure—a really bad idea.
As the prior Premier League Season drew to a close in the spring
of 2015, Leicester was struggling. With a mere nine matches left, they
had a record of four wins, seven draws, and 18 losses; so they were in
danger of relegation. But the team had other ideas. They won seven,
tied one, and lost only one of the last nine games, managing to avoid
relegation. It was impressive, to say the least, but the idea that Leicester
might win the Premier League championship the following season
was far from anyone’s mind. Thus the 5,000-to-1 odds.
To upset the apple cart, during the offseason the team replaced the
manager who led them to their great finish that spring with Claudio
Ranieri. Many fans were puzzled by the move, but it worked out about
as well as it could have. Ranieri and his Leicester club did more than
merely stay in the Premier League—they won it all the very next year!
Since 1992 when the Premier League was created, only five teams had
won the league championship. Now there was one more. Leicester
City stunned everyone.
The Leicester coaches and players undoubtedly tried hard to stay
grounded and avoid overconfidence. Publicly, they never boasted about
their chances of winning, but deep down they believed they had a
shot, and they played their hearts out all the way to the final week.
They set their sights high and achieved what almost nobody deemed
possible. They went from near-worst to best in a single season.
Sports offers many such examples. That’s why we watch. If the
favorite always won, it wouldn’t be interesting at all. All sports fans
have had times when their team was expected to lose. Although they
know a win is not likely, they know it’s possible. They watch because
every once in a while, they get the elation that comes from an upset.
The experts hold up their logic, show film clips from previous games,
and trot out myriad statistics to support their claim. And then the
underdog wins anyway—what euphoria! When it happens, we can’t
wait to talk smack to the doubters in the office on Monday.
The same is true in business. Every year certain management
teams, though underestimated within their industry, somehow achieve
an outcome the experts didn’t see as possible. The only difference is
the experts are on CNBC and in The Wall Street Journal instead of on
ESPN. Can your corporate team be one of these upsets, and what
does it take?
Let’s look at it from another perspective. Say your company is the
favorite. Sure, there are other companies that threaten your industry
lead, but your management team is the best and is expected to sustain
the advantage. How do you avoid an upset? What does it take to
maintain a lead and avoid being Microsoft’s IBM? Or being Google’s
Yahoo (or, heaven forbid, Ask Jeeves)?
It all starts with aiming high. Few success stories in sports or
business begin with a goal to be mediocre. We don’t want to set up
unrealistic aspirations; but from wherever we are, we do want to stretch
higher. We want to move up the rankings and inspire ordinary people
at all levels of the organization to achieve extraordinary outcomes.
Most executives understand that they need to aim high to achieve
success. This is why it’s so confounding that the preponderance of
them use annual budgets and plans developed by their subordinates
as tools for setting performance targets in their incentive plans. Once
we tell the head of a business unit or functional department that we’re
going to use their plan as a benchmark for success, we have limited
their motivation to aim high.
This is a hugely important point in the context of the overall
message of this book.1 Given whatever level of performance a manager
actually achieves at the end of the year, if the budget was set at a
higher level of performance at the beginning of the year, they will look
worse against it—and most often earn less money. If they seek to earn
more, as they should, they have an incentive to plan for mediocrity.
The technical budget development term for this is “sandbagging.”
You know it well, for you have seen it many times—though doubtless
only by others. But despite the common awareness of the problems
that arise when using budgets as the basis for setting targets, most
companies still do it.
In chapters 13 and 14, I will provide a more complete view of
what’s wrong with executive compensation, and will offer morecomprehensive
solutions for fixing it. But for now, suffice it to say
that incentives should not be linked to performance against a budget
or a plan.
Once planning, forecasting, and budgeting are freed from the
shackles of the incentive target-setting process, forecasting and budgeting
can become more useful for actual planning. To begin the planning
process, a good start is to set “stretch goals.” These goals should
be a bit uncomfortable, so that they motivate strategic ideas that
will transcend the status quo, since we don’t want our managers to
just extrapolate what we do now. We don’t want mere incremental
improvements here and there; we want game-changing strategic
ideas—even if they cannibalize what we’re already doing. Why wait
for someone else to disrupt the industry when we can do it ourselves
and keep the benefits to ourselves (and our shareholders)?
In practice, achieving the right level of difficulty when setting
stretch goals is a bit of a balancing act. We want to expand our thinking
and strive beyond what seems readily achievable, but we also
must be careful not to set goals so high that our team views them as
unrealistic. Frustrating managers with unachievable benchmarks can
be every bit as counterproductive as sandbagging.
Consider the manager of a baseball team who wants to motivate
a hitter. The manager knows that Ted Williams was one of
the best hitters of all time and that he had a .406 batting average in
1941. Indeed, between 1876 and 1941, 28 players batted over .400
for a season. (For those less familiar with baseball, a batting average
indicates the percentage of the time a player gets a hit per at-bat.)
The manager could try to motivate the hitter by encouraging him
to hit like Ted Williams and bat .406 in the upcoming season. Yet the
hitter will know that no major league baseball player has had a .400
or higher batting average since 1941, and so he almost certainly will
view the goal as unrealistic. The goal will likely be dismissed and have
no positive effect on his motivation.
Maybe there is a better goal. Let’s assume that the hitter batted
.275 last season (27.5% of at-bats resulted in a hit). The manager may
explain to the hitter that the top hitter in major league baseball in
each year from 2008 through 2017 had a batting average of between
.336 and .365, for an average of .349. So, perhaps the manager should
encourage him to strive to close about one-third of the gap between
his current average and the overall .349 average of these batting champions.
Or, in other words, he should aim for a batting average of at
least .300. This will seem much more feasible than batting .400, and
will most likely raise both the player’s eagerness to meet the goal and
his expectation of being able to achieve it.
Striving for a stretch goal may or may not be the best way to
motivate a baseball player. I don’t know, as I’ve never coached baseball
players, at least none over the age of 12. But I do know that striving
for a stretch goal is a great way to motivate most business leaders.
One way to think about setting goals is to consider the expected
probability of achievement. In this context I am not talking about an
exact numeral probability, but more a general sense of difficulty felt
by the manager to whom the goal is assigned. The first type of goal
to consider is the sandbagged goal. This occurs when a business unit’s
managers roll out a laundry list of strategic and competitive obstacles
that make success more difficult and then propose a profit budget or
plan that the managers claim is tough, but is in fact quite achievable
(if not indeed “soft”). When creating such budgets, the managers also
typically fail to describe the positive things that will help them achieve
success, lest the benefits of these items be rolled into the budget (as
well as the incentive plan target). These sandbagged budgets are met
or exceeded most—let’s say 70% to 80%—of the time.
Next, we have the “most likely” budget. This would be a higher
level of profit achievement, such that the manager truly believes that
the actual performance is equally likely to end up above or below
the budget—not what they say they believe, but what they actually
believe. These most-likely budgets are, by definition, met or exceeded
about 50% of the time. My experience, having sat through a host of
conference sessions led by financial planning and analysis experts
from all around the globe, is that this is the outcome the experts are
usually looking for.
In fact, I have heard such planning and analysis experts say that it’s
just as bad to end up above your profit budget as below it. “Errors are
errors,” they say. “If you don’t hit the budget, you didn’t plan right.”
That may be valid for measuring the planning department, but to the
manager or owner of a business, more is always better. Earning more
than the budget shouldn’t be viewed as negative, even if it arouses
suspicions of sandbagging. On the other hand, costs are more likely
to get out of control if they weren’t planned for in advance. And the
same applies to unplanned and ill-advised capital expenditures. In this
sense, the experts have a point.
I prefer to think of the main purpose of plans as financial planning
itself—that is, providing both the business units and headquarters with
reliable estimates of spending and capital requirements. But because
of the temptation they offer for sandbagging, such plans should not
serve as the basis for performance evaluation or incentive compensation.
For example, I would much prefer to plan for $100 million of
profit and achieve $80 million than to plan for $60 million and achieve
$70 million. In other words, I would prefer that my business earn
$80 million rather than $70 million, regardless of the plan or budget.
Setting Stretch Goals
This leads us into the discussion of setting aspirational goals. Seeking
to achieve a goal that is maybe only 20% to 40% likely to be achieved
requires more than merely the status quo plus a few incremental
improvements here and there. Not that these incremental improvements
are bad, but more is required to consistently exceed investors’
expectations, and this tends to make a management team a little less
comfortable. “Where are we going to find more improvements? Maybe
we should take that research we did and use it to improve the product
and drive market share or pricing. Maybe we should push into that new
region we have been talking about to secure new customers and more
sales. Or maybe we should get off the dime and acquire that smaller
competitor that has new products and brands or is in that region we
seek to be in.” Sure, there is risk in new products, new regions, and
acquisitions, so we need to be careful to balance risk and return. But
the conversation is taken much more seriously when we have to find
a way to close the gap to a stretch goal than with sandbagged goals
that are almost automatically achieved.
Companies that effectively use stretch goals to drive their planning
and managerial processes tend to be more creative, more resourceful,
and more driven. They typically invest more and grow more.
And they are highly results-focused in every stage of the planning,
decision-making, and execution processes. This all results in more
value creation.
Although stretch goals can work as part of an annual budgeting
process, they are more effective as the start of a longer-term, threeto
five-year planning process. Even though RCE tends to show the
benefits of new organic and acquisitive investments sooner than return
on invested capital or economic-profit metrics, large strategic investments
still take time to devise, develop, execute, and show up in results.
One technique for setting aspirational goals is to derive them from
the market. Remember that the net present value of RCE links back
to corporate valuation. Normally, we forecast financial performance,
convert the forecast to RCE, and calculate the present value of RCE
to determine the valuation of the forecasted performance. For goal
setting, we do this process in reverse.
The expected RCE can be calculated and linked to the drivers
of revenue growth, margin, and other key variables, to indicate a
reasonable path to achieve investor expectations. If everything stays
the same, we would expect that should management achieve this
forecast, the share price will grow at the cost of equity that is implied
by the Required Return.
The first step is to determine the average future RCE improvement
that is implied by the current valuation. Usually we start with
either the RCE from the prior year or, if the current year is expected
to be very different, the RCE implied by consensus forecasts for
the current year. If we then make the simple assumption that RCE
remains flat, it is easy to determine the valuation implied by this
flat RCE. If this valuation is significantly higher or lower than the
company’s current market cap, then we need to adjust the RCE forecast
to reflect a straight-line performance decline or improvement
that equates the company’s implied value with its actual valuation
in the market.
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Residual Cash Earnings for Amazon.com, Inc.
Valuation on 12/31/2018 indicates
a decline in RCE going forward
Figure 18—Amazon RCE Expectations
Consider, for example, the expectations for future RCE improvement
for Amazon (as of December 2018), shown in figure 18. Using
these numbers, we can then solve for a combination of growth, margin,
and investment by year that exactly corresponds to the RCE trend and
that seems plausible versus current performance. Preparing such a
forecast is a blend of science and art. If we assume too much growth,
then margins may need to decline in a seemingly random way to
achieve the RCE forecast. If we don’t assume enough investment,
asset intensity may decline rapidly while Reinvestment Effectiveness
skyrockets—both in ways that fail the smell test. When a combination
of growth, margin, and investment is settled on that feels balanced
and plausible, we refer to this as the “investor expectations” forecast.
For Amazon, then, the RCE growth rate required to achieve the
“investor expectations” forecast is much lower than the actual historical
growth rate, and is indeed a decline. If the historical rate of RCE growth
is achieved in the future, TSR will likely be very high, as it has been in
the past. The share price declined in the fourth quarter of 2018, and it
seems investors are betting they cannot keep up the RCE growth trend.
Thus far, this analysis reflects investor expectations that will typically
not include enough improvement to be considered a stretch goal.
Sometimes, though, the performance already baked into a share price
can seem to management like a stretch. In these cases, the stock price
may be “too high.” Not many executives are comfortable thinking, or
even worse saying, that their share price is too high. Logic, however,
tells us that we should expect our price to be too high about as often
as it is too low. But many executives don’t see it that way, which is
why this analysis is so useful. In chapter 8, we will address the capital
deployment strategy implications of share prices that seem to reflect
either overly aggressive or pessimistic expectations.
Many companies set aspirational goals that imply growth above
what is embedded in the share price. The simplest approach would
be to arbitrarily pick a number. For instance, in the Amazon example
shown in figure 18, the company’s RCE is expected to decrease by
about $1.4 billion per year. Note that this doesn’t mean sales and
profits are expected to decline, but that the capital costs are expected
to rise faster than the GCE, perhaps due to the very large ongoing
investments in airplanes and other elements of the company’s in-house
distribution network. Management could choose to set a stretch goal
at, say, $5 to $10 billion per year. Unfortunately, picking an arbitrary
number doesn’t give us much sense of achievability.
A much better approach would be to strive for top-quartile
TSR over, say, the next three years. Averaging the last 100 three-year
cycles, rolling back monthly from December 2018, we find that the
75th-percentile company in the S&P 500 delivered annualized TSR
that was about 8.1% higher than that for the median company. This
number could alternatively be derived from the Russell 1000 or an
industry peer set. For example, the 75th-percentile consumer discretionary
company delivered 9.4% more annual TSR than the median
consumer discretionary company, but in utilities this gap was only
3.8%. It is no surprise, of course, that in some industries performance
varies more, and it takes a greater level of outperformance to be topquartile.
Bear in mind, though, that generating an extra 3.8% TSR per
year in a heavily price-regulated—and, often, rate-of-return-regulated
utility—environment may be a lot tougher than it seems.
In any case, the process for setting aspirational goals begins by
increasing the starting share price for the above analysis by growing
it at the cost of equity, plus a premium corresponding to the 75th
percentile, which we then discount at the present cost of equity. Let’s
use 8% for the example that follows.
Consider a company with a $20 share price and a cost of equity
of 10%. We would first grow the share price out three years at 18%—
that is, the 10% cost of equity plus the 8% premium required to be
top-quartile on TSR. This gives us $32.86, which is the expected price
three years from now if we achieve 18% share price performance.2 We
would then discount this back to the present at 10% to get a value of
$24.69. Finally, this would be used in an analysis similar to the above
investor expectations example to set aspirational goals for growth,
margin, and the other key variables. This is a useful process because
it sets a goal for how much investment and return are required to
produce the RCE growth that is expected to be needed to become a
top-quartile TSR company. If everything stays the same, we would
expect that if management can achieve this forecast, the share price
should grow at a level that is expected to be top-quartile (as shown
in figure 19).
Top Quartile TSR
PV at Cost of
Equity
$15
$20
$25
$30
$35
0 1 2 3
Present Value of Top Quartile TSR
Stock Price
Top Q Premium
Stretch TSR
Present Value
Figure 19—Top-Quartile TSR
This approach has the virtue of being objective and explainable.
Not that we need to explain all the math, but it seems better to tell
your investors “we analyzed the level of RCE improvement that we
believe is needed for us to be a top-quartile stock,” as opposed to “we
increased investor expectations by X because we said so.”
As a kick-off to the planning process, these aspirational goals can
be allocated by business. And during the planning process, the businessunit
management can be tasked with building a plan to achieve some
combination of the five tools that deliver the aspirational business goal.
Management may not always be able to get there, but gaps between
the sum of these plans and the aspirational consolidated goal can
potentially be filled through acquisitions. This and other loose ends
will be discussed in chapter 11.
Consider a company with three business units that has been
through the above process and has set a consolidated aspirational goal
of improving RCE by $25 million per year. Let’s initially assume the
business units all have similarly modest expectations for improvements
in growth and profitability. In such a case, we can simply allocate
the aspirational goal for RCE improvement based on current value,
which for each of the units we might roughly estimate as its gross
operating assets plus the capitalized value of its RCE. Take the largest
business unit A, which in the example has GOA of $1.4 billion, RCE
of $40 million, and a required return we will assume to be 10%. The
present value of repeating $40 million of RCE indefinitely is simply
$40 million divided by 10%, or $400 million. Add this to the GOA of
$1.4 billion, and we get a rough-and-ready valuation of $1.8 billion.
Business unit B is smaller, but has a higher RCE. Business unit C has
much more GOA but has negative RCE. Figure 20 depicts the simple
valuation along with the allocation of the goal: to improve RCE by
$25 million per year at the consolidated company.
For each business, we now have an aspirational goal to serve as a
starting point that management can strive for when planning. How
much can the businesses grow, and which sort of investments are
needed to deliver that growth? What are the pricing, cost-efficiency,
or capital-productivity opportunities? The aspirational stretch goal
is designed to make them uncomfortable and encourage thinking
about big opportunities that, despite the risks associated with pursuing
them, could yield significant value.
Note that this is only one of many ways in which we can allocate
an improvement goal. We could also allocate it by revenue, for
growth-oriented businesses, or by GOA for capital-intensive businesses.
Sometimes the business units don’t face the same growth and profitability
opportunities. In the above example, business C may have been
struggling against new competitors the last few years, and experienced
declining RCE. In such cases, corporate management may view simply
maintaining the current RCE to be commendable performance; but
in that event, more of the corporate-wide expected improvements
will need either to be assigned to other units or perhaps to be accomplished
via acquisition. This process requires careful consideration.
$ millions Bus. A Bus. B Bus. C Total
RCE 40 50 (30) 60
Capitalized RCE (@ Required return of 10%) 400 500 (300) 600
Gross Operating Assets 1,400 400 600 2,400
Simple Valuation (GOA + Capitalized RCE) 1,800 900 300 3,000
Allocation Key (% of Value) 60% 30% 10%
Aspirational Goal for RCE Improvement per Year 15.0 7.5 2.5 25.0
Goal Allocation Across Business Units
Figure 20—Allocating Aspirational Goals
Once we deviate from the value allocation in the figure, subjectivity
and judgment inevitably come into play. But there are two important
reasons why this subjectivity may be more acceptable than the
typical subjective negotiations that go on in annual budgeting. First,
one very important objective, which we will return to later, is the
separation of pay from budgets, plans, and even the aspirational goals
that we’ve just been discussing. Each manager wants to improve his
or her RCE as much as possible, regardless of whether the improvement
is higher or lower than goals, plans, or budgets. So, when a CEO
asks business-unit managers if they believe it would be reasonable to
plan for achieving more aggressive goals, the managers may say yes
or no—but they all know that if the units achieve more, the CEO as
well as the managers will make more. There is no incentive to sandbag
or to demand anything other than realistic stretch goals.
The second reason this subjectivity is more acceptable—and can
actually be valuable—is that it provides useful information that will
be applied to capital deployment decisions. This will be more fully
discussed in chapter 7, where we will consider the best ways to manage
the portfolio of businesses. For now, suffice it to say that the goal is
to deploy capital where expected RCE improvements are largest and
most likely to be realized. Planning a corporate portfolio strategy for
a business unit should, of course, begin by considering its past performance.
Perhaps the unit should be sold if it has persistently declining
RCE and if management is essentially throwing up its arms, saying
there is “no way” to improve RCE, given the business, its capabilities,
its competitors, and the alternative strategies considered. Maybe we
need to monetize the value of the business by simply selling it to an
owner with more valuable synergies that may be willing to pay more
than the business is worth to us. Then we can redeploy the capital
into business activities where we can improve RCE. Or, alternatively,
maybe the business is fine and we just need to find a new management
team for the unit.
With all that said, this process of setting aspirational goals that
are 20% to 40% likely by trying to achieve the RCE growth associated
with a 75th-percentile TSR company is far from foolproof. Some
businesses have a lot more, or less, opportunity, so management can
adjust the aspirational stretch goal to calibrate it to an appropriate
level of difficulty. Still, the process is useful in understanding what is
needed over the long term to stimulate thinking beyond the status
quo and thus to exceed expectations.
Notes
1 Michael C. Jensen, “Integrity: Without It Nothing Works,” HBS Working Knowledge,
December 17, 2009, accessed January 15, 2019, https://hbswk.hbs.edu/
item/integrity-without-it-nothing-works.
Jensen has identified inadequate budgeting as possibly the single most important
failing of incentive compensation systems in U.S. companies. Indeed, he puts the
budget at the heart of what he views as a lack of “integrity” that ends up reducing
corporate efficiency and value.
2 Note that the full 18% should be used even if the company pays dividends, though
this overstates the expected share price appreciation, since it keeps it consistent
with the 10% discount rate.