THEY SAY YOU can lead a horse to water but you can’t make it
drink. I don’t know much about horses, but I do know that you can
implement new performance metrics and business processes, and then
you can back them up with supportive incentive programs. However,
it’s very hard to get managers and executives to change their longstanding
habits and behaviors. Implementing the ideas presented in
this book is not about metrics, models, or processes; it’s about changing
human behavior. It’s change management and it is successful only
about half the time, according to researchers in the field.
By far the most important first step in creating an ownership
culture is to get senior executives to buy in and commit to a new way
of thinking and behaving. It would be so easy to “talk the talk” and
expect people to do things differently because they’ve been told to, yet
it doesn’t work that way. Even after a full day of training, people tend
to go back to their desks and do what they’ve done before. It takes
constant reinforcement to overcome the natural human tendency to
maintain familiar habits and behaviors.
It is also critical that a company’s executives establish a “protocol” to
reinforce the behaviors they seek, accompanied by constant reminders
and reinforcements. For example, in many companies, managers fear
operating reviews when their numbers are short of plan. That fear can
contribute to an incentive to sandbag, even after the incentive targets
are no longer derived from the plan. Executives must learn how to act
in this new world by always emphasizing that, when it comes to value,
more is always good and less is always bad. And they must realize that
creating value is not easy, especially given the intensity of competition
in most industries. So, it can be helpful to maintain a set of brief statements
that convey a clear and simple message, such as “I’d rather plan
for $10 million of profit and achieve $8 million than plan for $5 million
and achieve $6 million. In other words, I’d rather make $8 million than
$6 million.” When managers fall back into old negotiating behaviors,
even these simple mantras can help reset their perspective.
When a superior asks a business or department head if they
can improve performance in their plan or budget, it can be good to
remind them that this higher performance will make both of them
richer. “We are both on the same side of the table,” you can say, “so
it’s worth trying to figure out a better plan and then aim to achieve it.”
Or, when a subordinate presents a forecast and asks a senior
executive to approve a major investment, it’s important to remind
them that the forecast is useful only for making decisions, and in
the end it’s the results that matter. If the new investment beats the
minimum required return, then RCE will rise, value will be created,
and bonuses will also rise. With that being said, the crucial question
to ask subordinates is: “Do you have enough confidence in your
forecasted RCE improvements that you are willing to put your own
money on the line?”
It is vital to have the right spending authorities at each level of
the organization. If managers must ask permission for even trivial
expenditures, they will have a harder time embracing an ownership
culture. But senior executives shouldn’t feel any pressure to increase
authorities too quickly. By always asking whether subordinates have
enough confidence in their forecasted RCE improvements before
approving investments, managers cultivate the feeling of ownership.
Over time, as the ownership culture takes hold and is clearly embraced
by most of the organization (it will never be adopted by all), it may
be reasonable to increase local autonomy for decision-making, but
only after the intended RCE accountability has been established and
is clearly embraced.
Many years ago, when I was collaborating on an EVA implementation
with Sir Roderick Deane, then the CEO of New Zealand Telecom,
the rollout plan was driven by a cascading leadership structure. When
I trained the direct reports to the CEO, he kicked off the session with
a pretty meaningful 20- to 30-minute introduction on why we were
doing this and what it meant to him. Just before he turned it over
to me, he advised his leadership team that the next step was for me
to train their direct reports, and that they would be responsible for
the session kick-off comments. Knowing they would need to speak
about EVA in front of their team, in their own words, Deane wisely
knew they were sure to pay attention to my training. And his words
conveyed no doubts at all about his commitment to our effort. As
the EVA training percolated throughout the organization, each group
received an initial introduction from their leader at the start of training,
which encouraged them to pay attention.
One of the major obstacles to change is the aloofness people feel
in organizations that seem to be in a constant state of culture change.
They wonder, “What will they be teaching us next week?” And they
whisper, “Maybe if we ignore it, it will go away and be replaced by
some new fad next week.” This attitude can be a major obstacle that
makes the effort much harder—but it’s important to avoid throwing
in the towel and to recognize that strong, decisive leadership will
be needed to reinforce the new behaviors for some time before the
changes stick. It will be worth it.
Though the entire company leadership needs to be the face of the
change, it’s important that this leadership be supported by teams with
the knowledge and skills to establish a training and support network
for the larger organization. When these ownership principles and
methodologies are new, there is simply too high a risk that strategic
situations and financial figures will be misinterpreted, so having experts
is essential. For example, when I was a partner at Stern Stewart, I
met numerous times with a large oil and gas services company about
implementing EVA; in the end, they didn’t engage us but instead
entrusted their finance department with the implementation. I felt
frustrated at the time, but years later I learned that the decision was
much worse for them than for me. They did a poor job of designing
the approach, and an even poorer job of getting the organization to
understand and embrace it.
Over a decade later, another company brought us in to work on
an implementation, and several executives had been at the company
mentioned in the prior paragraph. We took the time to discuss what
happened with the previous failed implementation. Most of these
managers expressed their frustration by telling me outright: “EVA
doesn’t work.” But then I found out that their former employer had
emphasized the absolute level of EVA in bonus plans, not the improvement.
So those lucky enough to run the highest-return businesses
earned huge rewards, even if the EVA improvement was subpar, and
the leaders of the weakest businesses could do nothing to earn much
bonus at all. The poor-performing businesses drastically needed top
talent to execute a turnaround, yet nobody wanted to work there.
Also, as the company used the typical EVA approach of measuring
net profits against a capital charge on net capital, the milking
of old assets became an art form while the prospect of investing in
the future wasn’t a priority at all. I learned of this when one of the
managers attended my training session at the new company, and he
remarked, “I know how to beat this EVA game! You go get the oldest
[that is, most depreciated] piece-of-crap asset you can find, and you
shine it up so it looks new.” I explained that in fact the new metric—
a customized version of RCE—uses a capital charge based on gross
assets, so no matter how old and depreciated an asset becomes, the
capital charge stays the same. After resisting the idea at first, he told
me a few days later, “You’re geniuses!” I then said I estimated that the
original company had underperformed by so much, and for so long,
that they had potentially left “a billion dollars” of market capitalization
on the table—and then I joked that we wouldn’t have charged
them even half that much to help them get it right.
Communication, Training, and Coaching
Internal leadership and the external implementation teams need to
identify every potential obstacle to success before the rollout. They
must involve people at different levels, in different regions, and in different
functions to be sure they understand the potential roadblocks and
identify workarounds. For example, managers across many companies
have become so used to negotiating budgets that you can explain a
hundred times that budgets are no longer used as incentive targets;
and yet, when the first budget comes in, managers will still sandbag
it. It may seem nonsensical—and it is—but this just shows the inertia
of conditioned human behaviors.
To combat this tendency, the start of the budget process can
include a refresher on the new framework and offer some examples
of how to stretch the thinking and to plan more aggressively.
One way to identify such obstacles is to accompany the initial
internal communication of the new management approach with
an electronic questionnaire that encourages people to answer
the question, “this may not work because _____________.” The
findings can serve as a checklist when developing communications
and training materials.
When writing an article or making a presentation, experts say
you need to first tell your audience what you are going to tell them,
then you tell them, and finally you tell them again—this time in fewer
words. An overall communications, training, and coaching program
works the same way—through repetition. Initial communications set
the stage by notifying the audience that changes are coming, with some
indication of what the changes will be. It’s best at this point to refrain
from any level of detail that will sidetrack the message, but instead
to keep it high-level and clear. Often you will place more emphasis
on the goals of the new management paradigm and less on how it
will be accomplished. One client included the following message:
VA Is Everyone’s Business
Our business requires a lot of capital. We renew our fleet
and facilities, purchase equipment and parts. We expand
into markets where our clients go. Growing our business,
gaining market share, buying new equipment, and opening
new locations all require capital—which is either borrowed,
directly invested by, or retained on behalf of our shareholders.
We attract capital by promising to deliver an adequate
return to shareholders.
If we don’t, they will invest elsewhere.
It can be very helpful to have additional information available on
demand when the initial communications are made. As much as we
want to keep the messages simple so that they are well understood,
some employees will be curious and want to learn more. Some of
them may well turn out to be “culture leaders,” so giving them access
to more information, perhaps through a company portal or intranet
site, can help get them on board. But even if this can’t be achieved
simultaneously with the launch, instructions should be provided for
those who want more information, perhaps an email address or a
phone number to call.
In addition to providing more in-depth training, as will be discussed
below, communication should continue regularly. Sometimes it can be
part of other normally scheduled communications, such as an internal
newsletter, and can gradually share more about the new program,
offering examples of things that have changed and the resulting benefits.
One company explained it to employees with examples like this:
Identifying Operating Inefficiencies: Can you find ways to
reduce waste, trim inventories, control expenses, or operate
equipment more efficiently? If you can, you’re improving
performance.
Generating Revenues: Are there things you can do to increase
sales by better serving customers, further improving the
quality of our products, or gaining a competitive advantage?
Sometimes it helps to quote a great leader. Here’s an example
(used by a company that was not Coca-Cola):
Here’s what the chairman of Coca-Cola Company, Roberto
Goizueta, says about the beneficial effect that charging for
capital has on inventories: “I learned that when you start
charging people for their capital, all sorts of things happen.
All of a sudden, inventories get under control. You don’t have
three months’ [supply] sitting around for an emergency.”
It can be helpful to pose questions to get people thinking about
how they can contribute. One client posed the following questions
to their employees:
BUILD: Commit fresh resources to endeavors that will more than cover
the cost of the new capital employed.
• What new equipment should we buy to provide new or better
products to our customers?
• What equipment should be upgraded to lower costs or improve
quality?
• What training activities will make people more effective?
• What marketing efforts will improve customer and end-user
satisfaction and will result in increased sales and profits?
• Can we spend less capital and achieve the same or better-quality
result?
OPERATE: Increase profits without tying up any more capital.
• How can we provide better service to our customers or sell
more products without spending more?
• How can we cut defects or increase yield?
• What vendors can supply the same or better materials at lower
prices?
• How can we manage internal budgets more prudently?
• How can we reduce working capital?
• How can we decrease cycle time?
• How can we increase productivity of existing assets?
HARVEST: Withdraw capital from activities that produce an
inadequate return compared to other uses for that capital.
• What products or customers aren’t as profitable as we want?
• What operating expenses aren’t getting us enough value?
• What assets should be sold or shut down?
As the basic practical ideas and activities behind an ownership
mindset begin to sink in, a comprehensive training program should
take it to the next level. Many types of training will be needed for
people in various roles. The most in-depth training will be given to
financial experts who need to understand the application of RCE
inside out and also to help others. At the other end of the spectrum
is the training of lower-level managers and supervisors who may
need to know the basic concepts but will never really have to do any
calculations using the new financial metrics. A good initial training
program can consist of a brief video or computer-based training that
goes beyond the scope of the initial communications, but stays at a
high enough level to avoid losing most people’s interest or buy-in. The
emphasis in this case is always on principles and guidelines.
Rather than focus on either of these extremes, the following will
describe an effective training approach for a fairly senior operating
team of managers. For example, a business-unit management team
may consist of a dozen or so managers representing a range of disciplines,
including operations, marketing, sales, administration, and
finance. The financial leader, in all likelihood, would have already
participated in financial experts training, but often joins his or her
colleagues for their training to help make sure they all understand it
and also to establish a partner-like bond while conveying the feeling
that “we are in this together.”
The training of financial experts should aim to provide them with
an in-depth understanding of “why” the new management processes
work the way they do, perhaps offering them capital market research
findings showing how companies that have improved these metrics
have, on average, delivered much better results for shareholders. But
the training of an operating team should focus more on “what” the
new management processes are and “how” they are to be used. As
much as possible, we want managers to be using the new metrics and
analytics during the training in much the same way we expect them
to be used in real situations.
One recent training program my colleagues and I conducted
began with a high-level discussion of the nature of ownership and
what it means to act like an owner. Examples were used that all began
with words like, “Let’s imagine you started your own business…” or,
“Consider a situation where your neighbor starts a business and you
agree to invest in it….” Of course, we are getting them accustomed to
the new mindset before we have even explained what it is! This helps
them develop an emotional connection with the principles, so that
we can come back to them at any point in the training to reinforce
more-specific points. It is far more important that everyone understands
the nature of the cultural change than that they’re able to do
the math. (That’s why we have a finance department.)
With that said, we do want everybody to go through the fundamental
math at least once. But if we did this by handing them the
company’s financial statements, we would lose them right away. So,
we need to build simple cases that are each designed to illustrate and
elucidate the principles behind RCE. The client sometimes competes
with small competitors, known colloquially as “mom and pops,”
so we built the cases around this scenario. The company provides
services to oil companies, and the initial case was based on a $1
million investment needed to buy a set of assets to support a work
team. This investment entailed cash operating costs of $350,000; a
total of $550,000 in annual revenue received from the customers;
income taxes simply set at 13% of EBITDA; and a required rate of
return on capital of 12%. The trainees were separated into groups
of three, given the information, and asked to calculate RCE for
this small business. Lo and behold, the RCE is positive, as shown
in figure 76.
Then you’re going to incur costs
(salaries, utilities, insurance)
Operating Expenses ($350,000)
EBITDA $200,000
Then you’ve got to pay the gov’t Taxes (13% on EBITDA) ($26,000)
Gross Cash Earnings $174,000
But remember the folks who
provided capital { Gross Operating Assets $1,000,000
Required Return 12%
Capital Charge ($120,000)
Only after “paying them” back
have you created any value RCE (Value Creation) $54,000
First, you need customers who
want to consume your services Revenue $550,000
Figure 76—Baseline Training Case
If this was indeed your business, you’d be quite happy—since
you’ve earned more than the required return on investment!
The second case, shown in figure 77, was designed to build on
this situation by contemplating a growth investment. To establish a
new team to provide similar services, we need to invest another $1
million in assets. But this time we struggle to secure a customer, so
the assets sit idle. Fortunately, we didn’t fully staff up, since we saw
it was going to be hard to put the assets to work, but the investment
still had an incremental cost of $50,000.
Adding an idle asset is rarely good, and in this case it drives
RCE down from a positive $54,000 to a negative $109,500. Notice
that Gross Cash Earnings only declines $43,500, or just over a
quarter of the total RCE decline. From this example, the trainees
learn that the P&L is in fact an incomplete indicator of the cost
of idle capacity.
Revenue
Operating Expenses
EBITDA
Taxes (13% on EBITDA)
Gross Cash Earnings
Gross Operating Assets
Required Return
Capital Charge
RCE (Value Creation)
Baseline
$550,000
($350,000)
$200,000
($26,000)
$174,000
$1,000,000
12%
($120,000)
$54,000
Case 2
$550,000
($400,000)
$150,000
($19,500)
$130,500
$2,000,000
12%
($240,000)
($109,500)
Figure 77—New Idle Assets
The training went on from there to consider a deal with the customer
to engage both service teams for a 10% discount, which would lead to
much better RCE, though still not as high as the initial single work team.
The lesson here is that making bad investments can have lingering negative
implications. We then added working capital, including poor receivables
collection, and it became clear how much capital can be consumed in poor
cash-conversion-cycle times. Finally, we tightened up accounts receivable
collection, and our RCE improved, demonstrating that improved capital
efficiency is interchangeable with cost reduction.
The cases went on—15 of them in total. The attendees had fun
working out the simple math and gibing back and forth as each team
stood up to take their turn explaining their answers. Since they were
working in groups, nobody faced any embarrassment if they struggled
with the math. Each case taught another aspect of what they need to
know, and the participants all left the session with a better sense of how
to improve performance than any sort of lecturing could have done.
As a bonus, even the facilitators learned a lot in the process, which
helps to improve each of their successive training sessions. Moreover,
the interactive experience helped unearth needs and opportunities that
can be elevated to the senior team. All of it amounts to an important
part of the “soak time” necessary to bring the framework to life.
If we stopped there, they would have had an enjoyable day, and
then gone back to work and done what they have always done—since,
as you know, changing behavior is tough. We can’t risk the mostsenior
managers’ not using RCE, as that would rub off on everyone
else. So, the next step is to coach them. The training involves simple
examples of real-world decisions, but our aim during the coaching
process is to get the senior execs to talk about actual decisions they
are now dealing with, or have faced in the past. By encouraging such
a discussion of a series of real decisions faced by the managers, we
get the chance to work out the answers together. This could include
the evaluation of new capital investments, brainstorming the pricing
of a product or a major proposal bid, or just about anything else the
manager wants to know how to answer by using RCE.
Closing the Deal
It’s always good to help managers see how the new decision processes
in which we train them will drive cost efficiency, capital productivity,
and overall value creation, which will all be beneficial for the company
and—if the company is a major employer and taxpayer—for the greater
community, as well. But managers also need to know what’s in it for
them, so, by all means, explain to them the new incentive calculations.
In fact, if the bonus calculations are explained early in the training
day, each of the illustrative cases can close with a determination of
the bonus implications. Managers will internalize the need for prioritization
when decision A increases their bonus by $195 and decision
B adds $25,000. We want the managers to see a direct connection
between what’s good for the company and what’s good for them. This
will strongly reinforce the ownership culture we seek.
Once they have adopted and implemented RCE, companies
should identify and celebrate real-world decisions that have
succeeded in increasing RCE. This will communicate to everyone
in the organization that improving RCE is both valuable and
worthwhile. It’s strongly advisable to document special cases in
company newsletters and other internal communications. Some
companies have gone so far as to set up a knowledge management
system to keep track of all the RCE wins, and then they use
it to share best practices across the organization. Even if an RCE
improvement that works in one business unit can’t be directly
replicated in another, it may stimulate the thinking to come up
with improvement ideas that are achievable.
One company even set up an RCE task force that received intensive
training designed to step up its expertise to the point where it
could then support local teams seeking RCE improvement solutions
to particularly tough historical problems. It rotated junior managers
from all sorts of backgrounds through the task force, and those participants
became RCE champions when they went back to their day jobs.
Every team leader has to “walk the walk” every chance they get.
The principles of owner-like behavior need to be discussed regularly
as the basis for decisions and tactics until they become second nature,
which could take years. Some executives think the organization should
change faster, “because we said so.” But change management doesn’t
work that way. Constant reinforcement is needed.
It’s important to recognize, going in, that an ownership culture is
different from the typical bureaucratic culture, so some managers may
not feel comfortable in this new environment. Many will welcome the
mindset, while others may need some leadership and coaching to get
them on board, like that shown in the prologue of this book. But there
very well may be 10% or more of managers who resist change, usually
in subtle ways. Some may opt out and seek employment elsewhere in
organizations that better fit their needs. Others may even need to be
“managed out” to signal the company’s commitment to fostering a
deliberate culture. But instituting and supporting an ownership culture
will also help attract more-entrepreneurial managers who would not
have even considered joining a bureaucratic organization. These shifts
in human capital can be necessary to effect cultural change, so they
must be handled directly and carefully.
Once, when conversing with an Amazon executive, I was impressed
not just with the quality of the company’s leadership principles, which
she shared with me and are shown in figure 78, but also with how
the executive emphasized that these are not platitudes to frame and
mount in the conference rooms. Rather, they are business commandments
by which one does one’s job. Frequently, one or more of the
leadership principles are raised in meetings to guide the way toward
the right decision. Every company should embrace such an approach
by establishing its own set of such principles, perhaps called “Owner-
Manager Principles,” and then actually using them day in and day out
to guide decisions. This can truly close the loop on reinforcing the
effective behaviors we seek.
Figure 78—Amazon Leadership Principles
Amazon Leadership Principles
We use our Leadership Principles every day, whether we’re discussing ideas for
new projects or deciding on the best approach to solving a problem. It is just
one of the things that makes Amazon peculiar.
Customer Obsession: Leaders start with the
customer and work backwards. They work
vigorously to earn and keep customer trust.
Although leaders pay attention to competitors,
they obsess over customers.
Ownership: Leaders are owners. They
think long term and don’t sacrifice longterm
value for short-term results. They act
on behalf of the entire company, beyond
just their own team. They never say “that’s
not my job.”
Invent and Simplify: Leaders expect and
require innovation and invention from their
teams and always find ways to simplify. They
are externally aware, look for new ideas
from everywhere, and are not limited by
“not invented here.” As we do new things,
we accept that we may be misunderstood
for long periods of time.
Are Right, a Lot: Leaders are right a lot. They
have strong judgment and good instincts.
They seek diverse perspectives and work
to disconfirm their beliefs.
Learn and Be Curious: Leaders are never
done learning and always seek to improve
themselves. They are curious about new
possibilities and act to explore them.
Hire and Develop the Best: Leaders raise
the performance bar with every hire and
promotion. They recognize exceptional
talent and willingly move them throughout
the organization. Leaders develop leaders
and take seriously their role in coaching
others. We work on behalf of our people
to invent mechanisms for development like
Career Choice.
Insist on the Highest Standards: Leaders
have relentlessly high standards — many
people may think these standards are
unreasonably high. Leaders are continually
raising the bar and drive their teams to
deliver high quality products, services and
processes. Leaders ensure that defects do
not get sent down the line and that problems
are fixed so they stay fixed.
Think Big: Thinking small is a self-fulfilling
prophecy. Leaders create and communicate
a bold direction that inspires results. They
think differently and look around corners
for ways to serve customers.
Bias for Action: Speed matters in business.
Many decisions and actions are reversible
and do not need extensive study. We value
calculated risk-taking.
Frugality: Accomplish more with less.
Constraints breed resourcefulness, selfsufficiency
and invention. There are no extra
points for growing headcount, budget size
or fixed expense.
Earn Trust: Leaders listen attentively, speak
candidly, and treat others respectfully. They
are vocally self-critical, even when doing so
is awkward or embarrassing. Leaders do
not believe their or their team’s body odor
smells of perfume. They benchmark themselves
and their teams against the best.
Dive Deep: Leaders operate at all levels, stay
connected to the details, audit frequently,
and are skeptical when metrics and anecdote
differ. No task is beneath them.
Have Backbone: Disagree and Commit:
Leaders are obligated to respectfully challenge
decisions when they disagree, even
when doing so is uncomfortable or exhausting.
Leaders have conviction and are tenacious.
They do not compromise for the
sake of social cohesion. Once a decision is
determined, they commit wholly.
Deliver Results: Leaders focus on the key
inputs for their business and deliver them
with the right quality and in a timely fashion.
Despite setbacks, they rise to the occasion
and never settle.
The Value of a Long-Term Outlook
According to research by the McKinsey Global Institute, long-term
companies1 exhibit significantly better performance than others. Revenue
for these companies cumulatively grew 47% more, on average,
from 2001 to 2014, and with far less volatility. What’s more, long-term
companies also showed higher earnings growth and hit more-stable
earnings throughout the financial crisis. And as the McKinsey study
also notes, the difference in value creation becomes even clearer when
measured through economic profit, which I believe I have demonstrated
throughout the book to be a much more suitable measure of
performance. From 2001 to 2014, long-term companies generated
a whopping 81% more economic profit than all other companies.2
So, it should be clear that companies that embrace a long-term
outlook consistently create greater value—therefore, we can trust that
the misnomer of “long-termism” used to refer to poorly evaluated
investments can be summarily rejected with the dissemination of this
research. But, as we have also mentioned throughout the book, it’s
not that easy to change a company’s culture and investment outlook.
This is where this prescription for an ownership culture can be of
tremendous value to corporate organizations.
Companies that embrace an ownership culture to promote a
balanced, long-term outlook will make more good investments, will
be more accountable for delivering desirable returns on those investments,
and will create more value. They will go by what investors do,
rather than what they say, and they will generate more cash flow, deliver
higher returns, and see their share price rise faster than at their peer
companies. Most important, they will feel less concerned with what
their share price is next week or next month, and more concerned
about what their share price will be in the long run.
Note
1 The determination of what constitutes a “long-term” company was made by
using a Corporate Horizon Index that factors investment, earnings quality, margin
growth, quarterly management, and earnings-per-share growth. For more on this,
refer to the methodology section of the study. Dominic Barton, James Manyika,
Timothy Koller, Robert Palter, and Jonathan Godsall, “Measuring the Economic
Impact of Short-Termism,” Discussion paper, McKinsey Global Institute, February
2017.
2 Ibid.