A LITTLE OVER a decade ago, I attended a seminar run by New
York University Professor of Finance Aswath Damodaran, which he
called the “loose ends in valuation.” It was highly informative, practical,
and entertaining, too. As you probably noticed, it was also the
inspiration for the title of this chapter, which discusses special applications
of the investment analysis and decision principles discussed in
chapter 10, each of which requires us to alter our approach and, in
some cases, also to incorporate additional information.
Investments in innovation and marketing are, in principle, similar
to investments in machinery and equipment, but in practice these
investments are expensed for accounting purposes and must, therefore,
be treated differently. Acquisitions are also different from capital
expenditures; it’s a specific core competency to be skilled at tracking
acquisition ideas, vetting them, negotiating deals, and, most important,
running the acquired companies after the deal closes. One last
special situation addressed in this chapter is “investments that don’t
earn a return”—as, for example, replacing the roof on a production
facility or doing repairs after a major flood. In other words, these are
investments that are hard to justify by using financial criteria alone.
Premium (Discount) Valuations
Just 15 years ago, a young Harvard University student named Mark
Zuckerberg launched the “FaceMash” website to allow visitors to
compare and comment on student pictures. But the site was shut
down by the Harvard administration and Zuckerberg was almost
expelled. In 2004 he launched “TheFacebook,” and certainly few, if
any, corporate strategy departments knew or cared. This seemingly
trivial idea was the seed from which grew the now globally dominant
relationship-based social media site and ad platform called Facebook.
Over the 12 months through mid-2018, Facebook delivered revenue
of $48 billion and net income of $19 billion, while attaining a market
capitalization that surpassed half a trillion dollars that summer—talk
about Jack (or Mark) and the beanstalk, with his magic seeds! To
allocate capital effectively requires forward thinking, awareness of
what’s happening in adjacent markets, and an organizational desire
to place enough bets on the future to be reasonably sure of not being
left behind, like Facebook’s predecessor Myspace.
Who could have seen this coming? I certainly didn’t, and I’m not
sure Zuckerberg did either, at least not while inventing the future in his
college dorm room. I don’t believe that aiming to match Facebook’s
miraculous track record is a realistic goal for anybody’s corporate
innovation processes, but it’s helpful to understand that such a story
is possible.
Using straight accounting figures, the net book value of all tangible
assets owned by the companies of the S&P 500 totaled $4.7 trillion at
the end of 2017. This sounds like a humongous figure, but it actually
represents a mere 18% of the total enterprise value of these organizations.
When they complete acquisitions for prices that are above the
attributable net assets, the price paid is recognized either as goodwill
or as “other intangibles” in the accounting books. This adds another
$5.0 trillion, making the value of all tangible and intangible assets on
the books of the S&P 500 companies much larger—$9.7 trillion, to
be more precise. But even this number represents only 37% of total
enterprise value.
As shown in figure 57, the total enterprise value of these companies
also includes another $16.8 trillion worth of what I call the “value
premium.” It’s simply the difference between the actual enterprise
value and the total net book value of both the tangible and the intangible
assets. This value premium is worth 173% of the total net book
value of the tangible and intangible assets! Where does it come from?
Net Tangible
Assets, $4.7T
Goodwill &
Other
Intangibles,
$5.0T
Value Premium,
$16.8T
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
S&P 500 (12/31/2017)
Components of Enterprise Value (% of Total)
Figure 57—Importance of Intangibles
Of course, one important source of value premium is innovation,
as in the Facebook example discussed above. Yet brand strength is also
important, since differentiated brands can support premium pricing,
market share growth, or some combination of the two.
Occasionally, a company controls a captive supply of some
commodity or an intermediate product that offers a sustainable
edge over the competition, such as a plastics plant built adjacent to
a sustainable natural gas production field. Premium value can also
derive from proprietary process know-how, sharper decision-making
capabilities, and both an execution mentality and a focus on results.
And even the ownership culture that this book aims to help management
create, as we show in chapter 13, can itself be a competitive
advantage, especially in large organizations.
Managing Innovation and R&D Investments
Executives should be sure to manage R&D and other forms of innovation
and development with a sharp focus on value creation. We
can’t actually force innovation to happen with financial measures and
controls, but we can certainly stifle it by using the wrong measures.
Our resource allocations for planning and innovation, therefore, should
be focused on areas where strong economics have been achieved or
where we believe the numbers are desirable. Innovation funding
should be freely available to fund good (or potentially good) ideas,
but this must go hand-in-hand with ongoing accountability for both
nonfinancial milestones and, eventually, financial results.
Managers sometimes seem to worry more about how much they
invest in innovation than about the result. As long as their expensive
benchmarking studies show that their spending on R&D as a percentage
of sales is reasonable, then all is fine, or so they assume. If poor
innovations result, they claim they have a bad R&D head or team.
They fire, they hire; but the results may never get any better. They
spend excessive time justifying expenditures and not enough making
sure that their investments generate a return. In many entrepreneurial
companies, the founder has a passion for innovation that inspires
everyone else to reach for the stars. Their collective excitement about
results reinforces the idea that it’s not the research itself that matters,
but instead the fruits of the research.
Many think the greatest virtue of Silicon Valley is its ability to
identify and fund good investments. But an even greater contributor
to the success of venture capital is the speed and decisiveness with
which firms in that innovative place often cut funding for bad ideas
or pivot to a more tenable strategy. This is also one of the biggest
differences between the corporate world, where R&D is frequently
allocated on the basis of arbitrary qualitative factors with ineffective
monitoring and infrequent spending reallocations, and the world of
venture capital, where the emphasis is on results. Many corporate
projects continue to be carried out for many years after their lack of
potential has already been identified. They place very little emphasis
on true accountability and delivering results. What’s missing is any
urgency about commercial viability—a criterion for investment that
is often subject to the whims of the head of the R&D department,
who may simply “have a feeling this is going to work.”
In an ideal world, the allocation, performance monitoring, and
portfolio management of a corporate R&D effort would function
like a micro-economy of angel investors, venture capitalists, startup
businesses, mature companies, and capital markets. The champion
of an R&D idea would secure funding by submitting a plan laying
out resource requirements, milestones, activities, projections, and
payoffs. If a sponsor approved it, our champion would then gradually
be given funding, as the projections deem appropriate, and as long
as periodic milestones are met. If the milestones are not reasonably
achieved, the sponsor would have the opportunity to pull the plug
and reallocate the financial and human resources. There would be
ongoing monitoring, coupled with resource reallocations as needed
to divert resources away from bad ideas and toward good ones.
From the outside, investors don’t know the exact state of affairs
in corporate R&D—and for the purpose of protecting trade secrets,
this is likely as things should be. But corporate management must
have a firm grasp of what the innovation investments aim to accomplish,
the status of development programs, and the expectations for
the magnitude and timing of results. This is not a delegated function.
Did Steve Jobs sit back and let innovation magically happen at
Apple? No, he led the process. This is one of the biggest obstacles to
success for conglomerates, since the CEO may well be responsible
for overseeing businesses in five different industries (as opposed to
just the one where he cut his teeth). How would Steve Jobs have
overseen innovation at Ford? I know, I know: He would have done
pretty well for sure, though most “normal” corporate people have
a hard time understanding customer needs and problems as well as
the innovation paths, technical drivers, and performance tradeoffs in
an industry they are less familiar with. So, they delegate with inadequate
accountability and the result, in the vast majority of cases, is
that the conglomerate business units are less innovative than their
stand-alone peers. They spend the money. They have nice, shiny
“innovation centers.” They reimagine everything reimaginable. But
they just don’t get the innovation bit.
Both in form and in function, the corporate innovation process,
which normally falls within an R&D functional mandate, should try to
adopt as many elements of American venture capital practice as are found
workable. A process is needed for midlevel and business-unit managers
to propose new R&D ideas to the corporate heads of the innovation
process and perhaps, depending on the size and scope of the proposed
investments requested, even to senior management. There should be
well-established project selection criteria, again ones that simulate the
approach of venture capitalists and investors alike. Each proposal must
include a description of the project, the expected outcomes, impact on the
business, milestones, resources, and projections. Clear opportunities for
go/no-go decisions must be specified in advance, including the metrics,
data collection methods, and boundaries for continuation.
A formal and regular periodic review process can be developed
and streamlined to focus exclusively on results and go/no-go decisions,
with reassessments of the future when appropriate. The management
process must be as fact-based and objective as possible, to ensure that
projects are delivering at or above planned minimum milestones,
otherwise resources should be properly reallocated. To be sure there is
adequate discipline, as in the venture capital setting, the default should
be that, when previously approved funding runs out, the project ends
unless it can secure additional funding. There should be forced rankings,
portfolio pruning, and maybe even forced ramp-ups for especially
attractive projects. We don’t want to be content with a “steady as she
goes” mindset for the best ideas; we want them to always be backed
with funding—funding that may well end up coming from defunding
the projects that didn’t turn out as well as originally expected (though
this should generally not be a requirement).
This innovation process should then directly feed the overall
business-planning process. This, after all, is not just a sandbox for
adult playtime—it’s work, often the most important work. Once these
R&D ideas begin to take shape, they should be assigned probabilityweighted
projections that feed the revenue and RCE growth of the
plan as a separate line item. The R&D pipeline should be discussed
in the planning reviews to the extent that the various initiatives are
expected to affect the five tools of value creation. Particular attention
should be given to reinvestment effectiveness, which, again, is a
measure of revenue growth per dollar of investment over a three- or
five-year period. When managers are asked to commit to the revenue
they need to deliver with R&D, they are more likely to prune ideas
that are not delivering according to expectations so they can focus on
ones more likely to make the R&D payoff.
The method of financial measurement is often an obstacle in and
of itself. Unfortunately, management teams are influenced by the
differences in accounting treatment between various types of investments,
and this affects how they prioritize investment opportunities.
Investments in R&D and marketing are expensed immediately as
period expenses, while investments in property, plant, and equipment
are typically capitalized and treated as having a longer life. These
differences can lead executives to invest far too much in one form of
investment, such as capital expenditures to build a new manufacturing
plant, and not enough on other types, such as R&D spending
for product development or brand-building marketing expenditures.
The Special Case of Acquisitions and Goodwill Accounting
Perhaps the most challenging of the rules for investment accounting
are the complexities and issues arising from acquisition goodwill. If a
company pays more for another company than a reasonable amount
that can be ascribed to tangible and intangible assets, the accounts
need to show an asset somewhere that is being purchased—hence the
creation of what’s called “goodwill.” Let’s say there is a $100 million
acquisition and, even after marking up some of the assets to reasonable
levels, we have $60 million of property, plant, and equipment
and $15 million of intangible assets like customer lists and brands.
The $25 million difference between the $100 million paid and the $75
million of acquired assets is attributed to the somewhat mysterious
goodwill, which reflects the purchase price premium over the book
value of the assets received.
Why would a company pay a premium over asset value? Perhaps it
has desirable products, brands, technologies, or customer satisfaction
that are capable of driving higher revenues and cash flows, possibly
through synergies. As we saw earlier in figure 57, across the entire
spectrum of U.S. publicly traded companies, well over half of their
current market value resides in this premium. When the acquired
company invested in its products, brands, technologies, or customer
satisfaction, this investment was expensed. But when someone else
acquires the company, then the new owner gets to treat these items
as investments in assets. Of course, after the acquisition, all new
R&D and marketing expenditures will once again be expensed as
period costs. To be sure, there is no logical problem with the notion
of goodwill—the problem is that at all other times accounting treats
these investments in products, brands, technologies, and customer
satisfaction as period costs rather than longer-term investments.
In principle, accounting treatment shouldn’t matter. If we invest
$100 million and it is reasonably expected to earn an adequate annualized
return over the next five or 10 years, that should be sufficient
for management to decide that the investment is worthwhile. For an
investment in a new plant, this is straightforward. But for investments
in R&D and marketing, many managements hesitate, because of the
treatment of these investments as period expenses in the accounting
books. Again, in principle, few executives will honestly claim
they’re driven by short-term profit and loss accounting. But in practice,
as management prepares for the never-ending stream of quarterly
earnings calls, investments that are expensed are often given a lower
prioritization than investments that can be capitalized and recorded
against earnings on a gradual basis over time, if at all.
If investments such as R&D and marketing are important to
your business, your process for evaluating these expenditures should
be the same as that for evaluating capital expenditures. Using the
methodology set out below, such investments should be considered
and prioritized simultaneously. All investments should be subject to
a similar test of worthiness, and the main question should thus be
whether the investment creates enough value to be included in the
company’s investment plans.
Managements tend to seek smoothly growing earnings and, since
R&D and marketing are expensed immediately against earnings, they
have an incentive to smooth out these expenditures, too, to avoid
making earnings unnecessarily volatile. But because opportunities
for good investment are often not so predictable, in years when fewer
prospects loom on the horizon, the company may tend to invest more
than the optimal amount in these expensed investments—while in
other years it invests less than it should.
Marketing Resource Allocation
Though the principles are the same, the typical impediments to effective
marketing investment are different from those that tend to stifle
innovation. Ask finance officers how much to invest in marketing
for a given brand, and they often seem at a loss.1 When it comes
to allocating marketing resources across a range of products and
geographies, the value-maximizing solution can be even more of a
mystery. What impact will this spending have on volumes, the ability
to raise prices, and long-term brand value? If marketing dollars are
reallocated from product A in region 1 to product B in region 2, what
is the likely impact on aggregate sales and profits? And what effect do
these decisions have on the stock price?
For the last 25 years or so, the standard approach to allocating
marketing resources has been through “marketing-mix modeling,”
which involves statistical analysis of periodic marketing and sales
data to estimate the near-term volume impact of raising, lowering, or
shifting marketing resources and also adjusting promotion and pricing
policies. Advocates use such modeling to enhance the effectiveness
of marketing allocations, even though the analysis ignores most of
the cost structure, the balance sheet, and changes to the strength and
differentiation of the brand itself. At most companies, the real focus
of such modeling is actually on maximizing sales alone.
While the mix-modeling approach seems somewhat logical,
critics claim that it is too short-term focused and doesn’t help build
long-term brand value. They contend that mix modeling emphasizes
current sales through promotion and price discounts, while largely
ignoring the value of innovation and brand-building investments,
such as advertising. True, mix modeling helps meet quarterly sales
and earnings guidance, but in many cases it will do little to drive the
valuation multiple and share price over the next few years.
For those who don’t think long-term brand value is an investor
priority, consider the case of the activist investor Trian Group and
the H. J. Heinz Company. The asset management group condemned
Heinz’s management for putting too much money into trade allowances
and promotion to drive short-term profits, while neglecting
the advertising and product innovation that would nurture differentiation,
long-term brand value, and stock price. After a failed proxy
fight and acceptance of some new board members, Heinz acquiesced
and increased its advertising budget. With such a strong emphasis on
making investments that provide long-term brand benefits, potentially
at the expense of sacrificing near-term results, this was certainly not
the old story of shortsighted activists pillaging a venerable company
for immediate gain that has become so common in business news.
So, what can be done to avoid the “sales-at-all-costs” trap of
mix modeling while ensuring that managements allocate marketing
resources in ways that will drive long-term value? Are there metrics
and decision tools available that can improve the balance between
delivering current performance and building long-term value?
As mentioned in chapter 7, in 2017 my colleagues and I began
working with a firm called BERA Brand Management, where Ryan
Barker and his team developed one of the largest brand-equity assessment
platforms in the world to explain and quantify how brands
grow. The framework and database they created not only explains
how brand growth translates to financial performance, but also takes
things a step further by explaining differences in market valuations.
As my colleague Joe Theriault and I reviewed some of Barker’s
original research on the linkage between BERA metrics and valuation,
a few lightbulbs went on. Managers constantly face a tradeoff
between driving current performance and managing for the long
term. The problem is that, from a purely financial perspective, they
have fact-based measures of current performance, but only forecasts
and opinions about the future. Most executives talk a good longterm
game, but when push comes to shove they make sure they hit
their near-term numbers, even if it means giving up some long-term
opportunity. It’s simply the present-day business version of “a bird
in the hand is worth two in the bush.” But now, thanks to BERA, we
have a fact-based way to measure, and not just guess at, the drivers
of valuation multiples that represent future expectations. Managers
can balance fact-based current performance and fact-based objective
measures of future performance. Having done what I’ve done for
over 25 years, I regard this as a true epiphany—and by far the most
outstanding breakthrough I have been part of.
But I am getting ahead of myself. BERA, which stands for Brand
Equity Relationship Assessment, is built around a battery of 100+
metrics that are rooted in behavioral science and market research.
While traditional marketing wisdom emphasizes awareness and preference
for a brand, BERA has found that these two qualities—plus
the metrics associated with each—offer an incomplete and unreliable
picture of the complex, often irrational dynamics of consumer choice.
Awareness and funnel metrics, like consideration and preference, are
informative but tend to be lagging indicators that tell you more about
what has happened than about what will happen. They follow sales
or, at best, provide contemporaneous indications. These metrics don’t
capture the underlying drivers of customer intent or consideration,
which makes them a far less reliable basis for driving brand optimization
or for validating, predicting, and orienting investment in the brand.
With the aim of addressing these shortcomings, BERA has developed
a multidimensional brand model that consists both of lagging
indicators, which explain how brand characteristics contribute to
a brand’s market share or revenue today, and of leading indicators
that explain and predict how a brand contributes to tomorrow’s sales
volume and pricing power. It is this combination of leading and lagging
indicators that makes the BERA framework ideal for bridging the
analytical gap between marketing and finance.
Fortuna Advisors completed a capital markets research study
that found strong relationships between the BERA metrics and a
variety of measures of stock price performance, financial performance,
and valuation. We studied a list of over 160 publicly owned
monobrand companies in the BERA database. (“Monobrand” refers
to companies whose majority of revenue comes from a single brand,
such as Coca-Cola, Delta Air Lines, or Facebook.) The study spanned
an eight-quarter period from the third quarter of 2015 through the
second quarter of 2017.
The first step was to verify that these brand metrics correspond to
the ultimate goal of driving higher TSR, or total shareholder return,
which includes dividends and share price appreciation. The monobrand
companies were sorted into high, medium, and low groups based on
their Today score, and the median TSR was calculated for each group.
The companies that scored highly on Today delivered median TSR that
was 0.7% higher per year than the median for companies with low
Today scores. This is a slightly positive relationship, but Tomorrow’s
impact on TSR was considerably stronger, with the median TSR for
the high Tomorrow companies being a significant 7.3% higher than
for the low Tomorrow companies.
Next, the Today and Tomorrow metrics were related to periodic
financial metrics like sales growth and rates of return, as well as to
valuation multiples, which indicate the collective view of investors
with regard to a company’s long-term trends in performance and
value creation.
The monobrand companies in the top Today group had 2.1% more
median revenue growth than the low group, and the top Tomorrow
group delivered an extra 2.3% revenue growth. Since revenue growth
is an important driver of TSR, it’s reassuring to note these findings
that the Today and Tomorrow brand scores correlate so strongly with
growth.
Yet growth for growth’s sake isn’t very valuable, so we tested the
relationships to return on assets (ROA), return on capital (ROC), and
return on equity (ROE). In all cases, scoring high on both Today and
Tomorrow were associated with higher returns and more improvement
in returns than the low Today and Tomorrow groups. The strongest
results were associated with ROE, whereas the median company
in the high Today group delivered 8.4% more ROE and 4.6% more
improvement in ROE than the low Today group. The high Tomorrow
group delivered 5.0% more ROE and 3.5% more improvement in
ROE than the low Tomorrow group.
It is encouraging, then, that higher Today and Tomorrow scores
correspond to higher sales growth; higher rates of return using ROA,
ROC, and ROE; and positive improvements in these return measures.
To complete the study, we examined the relationship of these brand
scores to valuation multiples, since high and increasing multiples can
be interpreted as signals of increasing brand value. The relationships
were tested for Today and Tomorrow versus the price-to-earnings (PE)
ratios and the enterprise-value-to-EBITDA ratios using both trailing
and forward (analyst consensus) figures. The analysis also included
price-to-forward-revenue and price-to-book-value ratios. For every
one of these valuation metrics, the companies with high Today or
Tomorrow scores were valued higher than companies with low Today
or Tomorrow scores. And in each case, Tomorrow showed a more meaningful
impact than Today. Since multiples tell us about the value of
the future in relation to today, perhaps it is no surprise that Tomorrow
seems to be a more powerful indicator than Today.
In sum, our research confirms that these metrics are highly related
to growth, profitability, and valuation multiples; and as such, the metrics
provide comprehensive indicators of both short- and long-term performance
that can significantly improve the typical mix modeling signals.
Integrating the insights provided by detailed brand metrics with valuebased
financial analysis can materially enhance the allocation of marketELEVEN:
LOOSE ENDS IN INVESTMENT DECISION-MAKING 235
ing investments, as well as boost innovation, CapEx, and acquisition
investments, by enabling optimization of short-term versus long-term
performance. We can improve strategic allocations at a high level, as
well as strengthen tactical allocations deep within the organization,
by consistently focusing resources where they create the most value.
Chief financial officers tend to prefer better financial performance
to a vague expectation of future benefits, so when they hear marketing
folks wax on about brand attributes, their eyes may begin to
glaze over. Chief marketing officers, on the other hand, probably
view long-term brand stewardship as critical to long-term success,
and may see the excessively short-term profit focus of their financial
executive counterparts as a sacrilege. Sometimes the marketing and
finance subordinates form teams to collaborate, but that’s a bit like
asking cats to collaborate with dogs. It takes more than the idea of
collaboration; it requires a strategic framework that bridges the two
functions in a way that encourages the evaluation of tradeoffs with
consistent, analytical rigor.
The first step in evaluating marketing investments is similar to
that taken for almost any other investment—we determine how much
revenue growth we can expect the investment to deliver. It is common
to rely on traditional marketing mix modeling to forecast revenue, but
the incorporation of brand-trait information substantially improves
the accuracy of sales forecasts (a common complaint of the finance
team, of course). This is because changes in scores can be used to
accurately predict changes in sales over both the near and the long
term. The other benefit of understanding these brand characteristics
and their changes over time is that it informs the best strategy to
maximize brand value—but more on that soon.
The second step is to estimate changes in RCE, which requires
an understanding of expected costs and investments involved with
sustaining and expanding capacity. Using our estimated RCE, we can
develop our first estimate of value, which is simply based on Gross
Operating Assets plus capitalized RCE (which reflects the present
value of the future performance if we expect RCE to remain flat.)
Some companies trade at a premium to this valuation, which means
investors are pricing in future RCE improvements based on new valuecreating
investments that have not yet been made. Other companies
trade at a discount, which implies an expectation that RCE will fade.
The third step is to gather and analyze the BERA insights. When
the BERA scores are high and rising, especially the Tomorrow score,
we expect a premium valuation, and vice versa. When we combine
the second and third steps, we get a value estimate, which we can
divide by current sales to ascribe a value-to-sales ratio to each brand
or subbrand.
In our article “Bridging the Gap Between Marketing and Finance,”
Ryan Barker and I demonstrated this process by building a case study
based on a hypothetical apparel company with four business units,
each represented by a real public company. The businesses chosen
were the following: Columbia Sportswear, designer and marketer of
outdoor and active apparel; Urban Outfitters, a retailer and wholesaler
of women’s and men’s apparel, home goods, electronics, and beauty
products; Chico’s FAS, a specialty retailer of women’s casual-to-dressy
clothing and accessories; and, last but not least, Lululemon Athletica,
designer and distributer of athletic and “athleisure” apparel. Several
of these companies operate multiple brands, but for the purpose of
simplicity we only included brand information on each company’s
primary brand.
Based on BERA’s data, Columbia Sportswear scored the highest
on both Today and Tomorrow, while Lululemon Athletica had the
highest Ratio of Tomorrow to Today, followed, in order, by Columbia
Sportswear, Urban Outfitters, and Chico’s. The ratio of Tomorrow
to Today appears to be a telling indicator of financial performance,
as suggested by the fact that it ranks these four brands in the same
order as when they are ranked in terms of four key financial metrics:
five-year revenue growth, current RCE margin, EBITDA multiple,
and value to sales. As can be seen in figure 58, neither the brand nor
the financial information is alone sufficient to explain the differences
in value to sales for these four companies. The Ratio of Tomorrow
to Today is quite similar for Urban Outfitters and Chico’s, but the
difference in RCE Margin is why the difference in value to sales is
material. Similarly, Columbia Sportswear and Urban Outfitters have
similar RCE Margins, but the difference in the Ratio of Tomorrow to
Today explains the difference in value to sales.
Of course, it may seem that we want to maximize either RCE,
which the chief financial officer may prefer, or BERA brand scores, as
the chief marketing officer may favor. It is likely, though, that neither
of these extreme choices is the value-maximizing decision. Maybe
the ideal marketing mix of TV, radio, and print advertising, when
coupled with selective social media, packaging, and in-store promotions,
will deliver a bit less than maximum RCE, but will do more to
drive BERA brand scores, which in turn drives the valuation multiple
higher. This combination of the financial and brand improvements
could thus deliver a better total return for shareholders.
190%
114%
69% 63%
Lululemon Athletica
Columbia Sportswear
Urban Outfitters
Chico's
BERA
Tomorrow/Today
Ratio 15.4%
7.1%
6.1%
2.9%
Lululemon Athletica
Columbia Sportswear
Urban Outfitters
Chico's
RCE Margin
496%
210%
119%
46%
Lululemon Athletica
Columbia Sportswear
Urban Outfitters
Chico's
Enterprise Value to
Sales
Figure 58—Value to Sales Driven by RCE and the Tomorrow/Today Ratio
Some have asked why the value-to-sales ratio is so important. One
investor friend reminded me that such ratios were often used during
the Internet bubble to describe companies that had sales but no profits
or cash flow. Just the thought of such abuse of metrics makes the hair
stand up on the back of my head…or it would if there were any left.
The value-to-sales ratio is the key to transforming marketing
mix models from sales optimization to value maximization. Look
back at figure 58—and no, that’s not a typo—and note that the
enterprise value of Lululemon Athletica really was almost five times
the company’s sales, while the same metric for Chico’s was less than
half of sales. In effect, each dollar of Lulu’s sales was worth over 10
times as much as a dollar of Chico’s sales. If these were truly business
units of a single multi-business corporation and the company
had managed marketing resources to maximize sales growth, as
most companies’ marketing departments do, then it is certain that
this corporation would drive too much low-value sales growth in
Chico’s and not enough high-value sales growth at Lulu.
Figure 59 illustrates the importance of the value-to-sales ratio.
First, let’s consider a baseline situation with two brands, A and B,
each of which is allocated $25 million of marketing spend. Once the
funds are optimized across multiple media, the brands deliver the
sales volumes shown in the figure.
Brand
Baseline
Marketing
Spend
Baseline
Sales
Baseline
Sales/
Marketing
A $25 $500 20.0x
B $25 $250 10.0x
Total $50 $750 15.0x
Figure 59—Baseline for Illustration of Value to Sales
Notice that brand A delivers twice the sales with the same marketing
spend, so the marketing department decides to allocate $5 million
that’s currently being spent on brand B to brand A while keeping the
total budget fixed. This is oversimplified, yet decisions like this happen
all the time as marketing-mix models are employed for optimizing
marketing spend both across media supporting a specific brand and
across brands, to optimize the overall growth rate.
Brand
Baseline
Marketing
Spend
Baseline
Sales
Baseline
Sales/
Marketing
Modified
Marketing
Spend
Modified
Sales
Modified
Sales/
Marketing
A $25 $500 20.0x $30 $600 20.0x
B $25 $250 10.0x $20 $200 10.0x
Total $50 $750 15.0x $50 $800 16.0x
%Δ 0.0% 6.7%
Sales Optimization
Figure 60—Sales Growth Optimization by Reallocating Marketing Resources
As shown in figure 60, the marketing management team accomplishes
6.7% revenue growth through its sales-growth optimization
process, and with no incremental marketing budget. When one brand
has a different elasticity of sales to marketing spend, these sorts of
opportunities will always be available. If our goal were to maximize
sales, we would be celebrating. But our goal is to maximize value, so
we need to know how valuable these sales are in each brand. And
that’s where the value-to-sales ratio fits in.
To make the example interesting, let’s assume brand B has a
value-to-sales ratio of 500%, as does Lulu in the case above, and brand
A has a value-to-sales ratio of 50%, which is similar to Chico’s. Now
if we examine the value implications of the sales growth optimization
strategy, shown in figure 61, the celebrations quickly halt as we
realize that this reallocation of marketing spend is actually a valuedestroying
catastrophe.
Brand
Baseline
Marketing
Spend
Baseline
Sales
Baseline
Business
Value
Baseline
Value to
Sales
Modified
Marketing
Spend
Modified
Sales
Modified
Business
Value
Modified
Value to
Sales
A $25 $500 $250 50% $30 $600 $300 50%
B $25 $250 $1,250 500% $20 $200 $1,000 500%
Total $50 $750 $1,500 200% $50 $800 $1,300 163%
%Δ 0.0% 6.7% -13.3%
Sales Optimization
Figure 61—Introducing the Value to Sales Ratio
The marketing reallocations may have driven sales growth, but
they do so by increasing growth in the brand that contributes much
less value per dollar of sales. Why are the value-to-sales ratios so
different? Perhaps brand B is so sought after by consumers that market
share is generally rising, even though it is priced at a premium to the
competition, while brand A has the opposite situation: It is losing share
even though it’s constantly being discounted and promoted. Brand B
probably has more revenue growth and higher RCE margin, and its
Tomorrow score stands well above its Today score, indicating a bright
future and a higher valuation multiple.
Unfortunately, most marketing departments have zero idea what
the value to sales is for their brands, so in their minds the sales-growth
optimization plan seems ideal. What would they do if they had the
value-to-sales information? Perhaps they would reallocate resources
in the opposite direction—from brand A to brand B. In fi gure 62, we
see that sales actually decline with this reallocation, though the value
of the company signifi cantly increases.
Figure 62—Using Value to Sales to Maximize Value
This is only an illustration, of course, but the optimal plan may
be to increase the marketing spend on brand B, as illustrated, and at
the same time to hold or increase the spending on brand A, as well.
As already intimated, the goal of this spending is not to maximize
near-term sales, but rather to improve differentiation and the Tomorrow
score, so that the value to sales rises. The Tomorrow score is composed
of two metrics: Uniqueness and Meaningfulness. While these are useful
constructs for quantifying a brand’s overall health across all sectors,
what it means to be Meaningful or Unique is particular to each brand
and sector. To address this, BERA has developed an array of emotional
and image-based traits whose associations with each brand can be
both measured and benchmarked so as to defi ne Uniqueness and Meaning
fulness for each brand. These traits can be thought of as a brand’s
DNA, or the building blocks that form our impression of that brand.
Put simply, to move the needle on Meaningfulness or Uniqueness, we
must change what people associate with the brand. And the BERA
approach guides the way.
In practice, defining and using the value-to-sales ratio is a bit more
involved, yet it’s not too complex for most managers to understand.
Even the basic notion of multiplying the sales output of the marketing
mix models by the value-to-sales ratio to maximize value would be a
huge process improvement for most branded companies.
Making Acquisitions that Create Value
It’s in vogue to say, “Most acquisitions destroy value”—but, however
fashionable, it’s simply not true. As previously discussed, companies
that invest more to acquire other businesses deliver average long-term
TSR that is higher than in companies investing less in acquisitions.
For example, in our article “Improving the Health of Healthcare
Companies,”2 we showed that highly acquisitive healthcare companies
delivered median annual TSR that was 3.3% higher than their less
acquisitive peers. We find directionally similar results in most industries.
Some acquisitions fail spectacularly, to be sure, but on average
acquisitions create value for the acquirer’s shareholders.
The necessary steps for success with acquisitions are clear, but
achieving them can be challenging and requires discipline to overcome
natural human tendencies that can stand in the way of success. To be
successful, an acquirer must first select a target company that would
genuinely be worth more as part of its organization than as a standalone
company or business unit of another company. Perhaps there
are production or distribution synergies, or maybe there is the ability
to scale marketing to new levels and achieve a level of revenue growth
the stand-alone company could never hope to achieve.
Often these benefits result from poor resource allocation—especially
at the tails, in big-value creators and destroyers. Some companies
simply tolerate waste in costs and assets, hold excess cash, or underuse
their debt capacity. These are the types of inefficiencies that tend to
attract PE firms. But “strategic” acquirers, which tend to be competitors,
or are at least operating in an adjacent market, rely more on
synergies to create value. Synergies are produced when an increase in
sales or reduction in costs or assets results from the two firms’ being
integrated. For example, consider a large firm with global distribution
that buys a small, regional firm with differentiated products. Both
businesses benefit from the other’s core competencies.
An acquirer can seek a deal in three areas: in-market, in adjacent
markets, or in an unrelated market. For the reasons mentioned above,
private acquirers can be less discriminating, but strategic acquirers
should rely foremost on companies in the same market or in adjacent
markets to achieve synergies. This all may seem obvious, but it’s
important to have a clear acquisition agenda so that those seeking
and sourcing the deal don’t waste time and resources considering
uneconomic acquisitions.
Next, the acquirer must negotiate a reasonable price for the
purchase—one that’s above the stand-alone value of the target, to
entice them to sell, but below the value of the target company to
the acquirer, with all synergies included. Finally, the acquirer must
effectively manage, and in many situations also integrate, the acquired
business and finally execute the plan successfully. Each step is fraught
with obstacles, so success isn’t likely to happen by chance. It takes
careful planning, shrewd decision-making, hard work, and leadership.
The worst method for finding good acquisition deals, though,
is to sit back and wait for investment bankers to come by shopping
their ideas. Occasionally, gems can be found this way; but first ask:
“If this business is so valuable, why does it have to be shopped?”
Investigate whether management has taken actions to inflate results
before “considering strategic options.” Look out for future performance
cliffs looming from possible patent expirations, fading brands,
or leapfrogged technologies. Try to spot any active short-termism
by current management designed to temporarily drive up prices and
revenue—and therefore the company’s valuation—while potentially
creating headwinds for future growth. Or maybe the company is
excessively sweating tangible and intangible assets by underspending
to maintain and support them. Inquire about the process to see if you
will be bidding against every strategic buyer and financial sponsor out
there, and always consider the odds of getting a good price.
Though good deals do sometimes drop in your lap, if you want
to be a successful acquirer, it’s best to set up an ongoing process to
track companies that could become acquisition targets. These are not
fully vetted targets; they’re just reasonable ideas that appear to make
strategic sense and can be tracked over time. All available information
on products, services, investments, and financials should be gathered
and evaluated to continuously update the status of each opportuELEVEN:
LOOSE ENDS IN INVESTMENT DECISION-MAKING 243
nity. It’s useful to meet with management occasionally, perhaps even
informally at industry conferences or through interaction of midlevel
employees. Most newly gathered information will merely be collected,
but at times fresh insights, such as the launch of a new, innovative
product or the cheap disposal of an unattractive business, will make
an opportunity more desirable. At other times, new information
that comes your way will make the target less desirable. It is best to
have a scoring system to quickly convey the status of what may be a
dozen or more tracked targets; and as targets reach a sufficiently high
score, they should be thoroughly reviewed as a potential acquisition.
This acquisition-tracking and -planning process helps your company
find deals that aren’t being shopped on the market; it helps provide
context for comparison when a likely deal does appear; and it enables
you to act quickly and decisively when a transaction becomes more
attractive—or less.
Often, corporate development groups have a short list of businesses
they think their company can make more valuable on acquisition,
even though the purchase price is currently prohibitive. As
is often the case in business, patience is a virtue in such situations.
In a similar fashion to equity investors who, looking for desirable
entry prices, follow attractive companies, corporate acquirers should
establish share price guidelines and track their best targets while
waiting for their number to be hit. Be sure to set the price low
enough that it will still be acceptable after adding a reasonable
acquisition premium.
When discussing the monitoring of acquisition-target prices, an
executive for one client asked us whether this patience was really going
to matter, given the efficiency of the stock market. True, markets are
relatively efficient over time, but new information is always emerging,
and expected long-term trends get whipsawed back and forth,
so prices can and do deviate from “perfect efficiency.” As mentioned
previously, during 2018, the median premium of the 52-week high
over the 52-week low for the Russell 1000 was 52%. If a company
acquires another when the share price is close to its low, the price can
become much more attractive, even after an acquisition premium that
may be a bit higher to compensate for the cheap price. Therefore,
waiting around for a good price can pay off, simply due to general
volatility in the market.
It is critical that the acquisition planning process actually facilitate
deals, and not just create some “for show.” Corporate development
executives sometimes express frustration with all their effort that goes
into tracking and evaluating opportunities, only to see that deals actually
get done when bankers visit the CEO with “hot ideas.” A properly
designed planning process instills discipline, yet that discipline can only
be effective if the process is relied on for the majority of acquisitions.
Once a deal becomes live, regardless of how it originates, the
real fun begins. Always start by understanding the stand-alone business
before considering the acquisition plan. Learn the products and
services, the customers and distribution channels, the production
capabilities and capacities, and, of course, the expectations for growth,
profitability, and investment. It is worthwhile to forecast and value
the stand-alone case to see how it stacks up on its own. For public
companies, this can be very useful as a comparison to the pre-deal
public valuation. It’s hard to make a deal work well when the starting
point is a public share price that overvalues the stand-alone business,
though there are always a few exceptions.
One example of an exception is a large pharmaceutical company
with a broad, deep, global distribution network. Such a company
may be able to create so much value when it acquires a fledgling
biotechnology company with a solid drug pipeline that it can still
create value when the acquisition price is several times what the
biotech target would be worth on a stand-alone basis. Some of this
tremendous potential upside will likely reside in viewing the target’s
share price as an ongoing premium to recognize the potential of
an acquisition, even well before any announcement of an actual
transaction. But as long as the value created is sufficiently above the
preexisting value plus this premium, the deal can still be successful.
In “Improving the Health of Healthcare Companies,” we found
that highly acquisitive pharmaceutical companies were much more
successful acquirers than the typical healthcare company, generating
almost 6% more TSR per year than less-acquisitive pharmaceutical
companies.
Once you understand the stand-alone business, you’ll need to
measure and then build a case for potential synergies, including
revenue synergies as well as all investments needed to generate
them. For some reason, many management teams emphasize cost
synergies more than revenue growth, which is unfortunate for both
their decision processes and their acquisition integration plans. For
example, sometimes the acquirer has a global footprint, as Becton
Dickinson did when it bought CareFusion. Considerable value can
result from the growth associated with global expansion of the target
company. So, be sure to explore and to include revenue-growth
synergies, otherwise good deals may be either missed completely
or suboptimally executed.
Some corporate development teams do extensive sensitivity analysis,
in which they test major assumptions in sensitivity tables or cubes.
This can be informative, though an even more useful approach is
to prepare a few thoughtful, comprehensive cases, both upside and
downside, for review. Mechanical sensitivities tend to miss the interaction
between external assumptions and the ensuing internal reactions
and choices. For example, consider a retail acquisition in which the
acquirer decided to pursue the more-expensive of two store refurbishment
strategies. Only probing same-store sales growth would miss
the fact that, if sales fell short of expectations, management would
have the early option to scale back to the less-expensive refurbishment
strategy for all remaining stores. By evaluating meaningful cases, then,
we gain a better sense of the true upside and the downside, and we
are encouraged to build flexibility into our integration strategies so
that we can adapt them when things turn out better or worse than
expected. Flexibility often costs money, so the baseline case may suffer
a bit. But by protecting against severe downside situations, the average
NPV across a realistic set of high, medium, and low cases will likely
be higher, at least over a long-enough period.
Once the baseline and acquisition forecasts have been developed,
we are ready to consider the maximum desirable acquisition price.
Again, RCE provides an exceptional framework because we can
compare the forecasted capital charges—a function of the purchase
price and expected investments after the deal—to the expected GCE,
both with and without synergies, as shown in figure 63.
The stacked bar chart shows the projected GCE both as standalone
and with synergies. The dashed box in year 1 reflects a reduction
in GCE, based on the costs associated with achieving synergies. The
solid line shows the expected capital charges, based on the expected
initial purchase price and the planned CapEx after the deal closes. At
that price, RCE is neutral in year 2 and positive from year 3 on. But
when negotiations get intense and either the seller demands a higher
price or another bidder jacks up the price, this type of RCE graph
can be quickly consulted. At the higher price, the capital charge solid
line rises to the dotted line, and the acquirer would have to wait until
year 4 for RCE to break even and would give up half the year-5 RCE.
This is a great tool both for providing insights and for maintaining
discipline during negotiations.
Integration Costs
1 2 3 4 5
Gross Cash Earnings & Capital Charges
Stand-alone GCE Acquired GCE Baseline Capital Charge High-price Capital Charge
Figure 63—Purchase Price Sets the GCE Targets
Some acquisitions take a long time to pay off, even with the
smoother recognition of performance made possible by using RCE
versus traditional rates of return and EVA. One important consideration
in such deals is that the longer a deal takes to show positive
RCE, the higher the minimum acceptable RCE Profitability Index
should be, both to compensate for the added risk and to be sure that
the value creation is truly worth the wait, in comparison to other
deals that show positive RCE sooner.
The final key element for acquisition success is execution. Topics
surrounding acquisition execution— including how goals are set,
plans developed, decisions made, incentives introduced, and newly
acquired managers trained—will be discussed in the remaining chapters
of the book.
Projects with Zero or Negative NPV
The NPV rule is considered the golden rule of corporate finance and is
featured in virtually every corporate finance class in business schools.
After decades of working in the shareholder value field, I have come
to firmly believe that the NPV rule is an accurate and comprehensive
way to evaluate decisions, as well as an extremely useful way to value
prospective companies.
Despite the general acceptance and validity of NPV, however,
every single company makes investments that appear to have zero
or negative NPV.3 This is not bad per se, as long as it is done for the
right reasons and properly managed. Unfortunately, many corporate
executives pursue negative NPV projects for the wrong reasons, and
fail to manage the process well.
Executives often, oddly, describe a decision as “strategic” when
it can’t be justified financially. It’s true that sometimes the benefits of
an investment are hard to quantify or are expected to take an unusually
long time to materialize. Yet if the financial benefits never arrive,
the investment probably wasn’t all that “strategic” after all! Don’t
rationalize a forecast that amounts to throwing darts at a wall; just
recognize that the benefits do exist—or will likely come to exist—but
may simply be hard to quantify or to predict.
In many companies, the problem begins at the start of the process.
Often, the capital investment approval process launches with a request
form indicating at the top whether this investment is for growth, for
improved efficiency, or for some other strategic reason. This latter
category can include investments to improve safety, comply with
environmental regulation, or maintain assets (recall our example of
the aging roof or catastrophically flooded plant).
Too frequently, when the “other” box is checked, it is just assumed
that the investment is required, so the approval process moves along
with little or no financial analysis. After all, if we know the NPV will
be negative, why do the analysis? It won’t affect the decision, right?
Herein lies a catch.
We can realize many benefits by preparing forecasts and evaluating
NPV, even when we know in advance that the results will yield zero
or negative NPV. We can still consider different investment alternatives,
to try to find the least-negative NPV solution. Perhaps we are
installing a scrubber designed to reduce emissions from a chemical
or industrial process. Our facilities engineering team has identified a
scrubber capable of handling the job, but it recommends a scrubber
twice the size that right now costs only 20% more. Purchasing the
larger scrubber will significantly delay the point at which the next one
must be added. Over a life cycle, this larger scrubber may be a choice
that has a less-negative NPV. Or maybe the smaller scrubber is better.
Who really knows, unless we do the analysis? Without it, it’s almost
certain that the smaller scrubber will be selected, as it consumes less
of the capital budget. And, after all (we assure ourselves), we will have
a new capital budget when a new scrubber will be needed!
Often, the problem isn’t that the investment has a negative NPV
but that the benefits are hard to quantify. Instead of throwing up one’s
arms and saying it can’t be analyzed, it is far better in some cases to
at least back into the NPV-breakeven forecast and to qualitatively
assess whether management believes the investment will be above
or below the NPV breakeven line. For example, we might think that
if we install a new research information storage system, and if the
researchers will access it on average 100 times per week, the system
will pay for itself (versus the manual retrieval process currently in
use). Will the new system be used enough to justify the new investment?
Corporate decision-makers are often more willing to indicate
whether a breakeven level of an activity can be achieved than they
are to submit a forecast of what might in fact happen.
Also important, we can then use the breakeven assumptions
to establish minimum milestones, financial and otherwise, that can
be tracked after the investment. We can monitor how many people
access the system each day and at least see if the expected benefits
are being achieved. This will also be useful information the next time
an investment of this type is considered.
Sometimes projects seem to have negative NPV because the investment
doesn’t make anything better; instead, it keeps something from
getting worse. If the roof isn’t replaced, it will leak and eventually we
will need to close the facility—or worse, it could collapse, resulting
in liabilities and safety hazards. Keeping a bad (or potentially catastrophic)
outcome from happening can save a company huge sums,
but whether the facility is running or not isn’t material to the NPV
analysis. So, we calculate the negative NPV of roof replacement costs
and investments, and still try to find the least-negative NPV solution.
In other cases, though, some companies go to great lengths to
execute strategic investments that appear to have negative NPV, but
nevertheless are believed to eventually provide some long-term,
nonquantified benefit. In some cases, managements deliberately tweak
transfer prices and misallocate costs and assets in ways that penalize
more-profitable projects to make these strategic investments appear
more attractive. These cross subsidies are intended to keep a resultsoriented
organization from terminating strategic initiatives before
they have a chance to stand on their own. Unfortunately, this propping
up of strategic investments masks their true level of performance;
this often endures for unconscionably long periods because of organizational
inertia and political posturing, resulting in bad decisions
where truly profitable projects are rejected for being saddled with
costs wrongly allocated to them.
Picture a private equity investor overseeing a portfolio company
that is making strategic investments that may cause losses for quite
some time, but where both management and the investor believe the
eventual scale and profitability will justify the early investments. The
investor plans to inject equity funds to support the burn rate during
the early stages, but, to manage risk and ensure accountability, the
investor may provide the funding in stages to be sure that everything
is on track before each tranche of funding is released.
Now imagine an unlikely scenario where the investor would prefer
not to see the burn rate in their strategic portfolio company, so instead
they provide excess funding to their other, more-profitable portfolio
companies, with instructions for one to provide seconded employees
at half their all-in cost; for another to provide raw materials at a steep
discount to market; and for a third to buy product from the strategic
business at a significantly marked-up price. Each of these other
businesses would suffer losses, which would distort their strategic
decision-making, their performance, their exit strategies, and their
compensation for the portfolio company managements. The resulting
mess would prevent any reliable analysis of the performance and
potential of all four companies. It’s no different with cross subsidies
within multi-business public companies.
When corporations rely on cross subsidies, eventually the
misaligned costs and assets run the risk of being treated as real. This
distorts operational processes, such as pricing, as well as strategic
decisions such as how much money to invest in growing both the
subsidized and the subsidizing business. It is better by far to face the
negative NPV, support the initiative anyway (if truly warranted), and
set clear financial as well as nonfinancial milestones that will signal
that the activity should either continue to grow (into positive NPV)
or be shut down.
To summarize, doing financial analysis on zero and negative
NPV investments is every bit as important as doing analysis for positive
ones. This will help both in evaluating alternatives to find the
least-negative NPV solution and in setting up minimum milestones
that can be used to track performance after the investment. When
forecasts are hard to create, consider using NPV breakeven analysis.
And always avoid subsidizing activities to make them look better;
facing reality consistently leads to wiser decisions.
Notes
1 Some of these opening paragraphs, slightly modified, come from “Brand Value
Drives Corporate Value,” by Gregory V. Milano and Joseph Theriault, and “Bridging
the Gap Between Marketing and Finance,” by Gregory V. Milano and Ryan
Barker. Gregory V. Milano and Joseph Theriault, “Brand Value Drives Corporate
Value,” CFO.com, August 21, 2018, accessed January 15, 2019, http://ww2.cfo.
com/budgeting/2018/01/brand-value-drives-corporate-value/. Gregory V. Milano
and Ryan Barker, “Bridging the Gap Between Marketing and Finance,” Journal
of Applied Corporate Finance 30, no. 2 (Spring/Summer 2017).
2 Gregory V. Milano, Marwaan R. Karame, and Joseph G. Theriault, “Improving
the Health of Healthcare Companies,” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 29,
no. 3 (Summer 2017): 18–29.
3 Gregory V. Milano, “When Projects Have a Zero or Negative NPV,” CFO.
com, August 8, 2017, accessed January 15, 2019, http://ww2.cfo.com/cashflow/
2017/08/projects-zero-negative-npv/.