THE PRIMARY EMPHASIS in this book is on business strategy
and operational execution, but financial policies are important, too,
and can help or hinder value creation. In most cases, financial policy
should be subordinated to business strategy. With that in mind, this
chapter provides insights on capital structure, operating leases, dividends,
and cash balances that are part of an integrated, overall view
of corporate finance.
Capital Structure Policies
Ever since the wave of leveraged buyouts in the 1980s, it has been
commonplace for investors, academics, and commentators alike to
suggest that “levering up” the balance sheet can be beneficial for
shareholders. As we first argued in “Is Financial Leverage Good for
Shareholders?”1 on CFO.com, our capital market research suggests
otherwise.
Most people generally try to be careful with how much debt they
take on in their personal lives, so why do many corporate finance
experts believe that high levels of corporate debt and leverage are
a good thing? And why doesn’t it seem to work out as well as these
experts tell us it should?
The appeal of debt originates in academic corporate finance
classes, where students are taught that reducing the weighted average
cost of capital (WACC) by operating with the optimal proportion
of debt and equity can be a major contributor to shareholder value.
Because the U.S. tax code allows a deduction for corporate interest
payments, WACC tends to be lower for companies that are able to
support more leverage, as long as the risk of financial default doesn’t
become excessive. A lower WACC increases the calculated present
value of anticipated future cash flow, which is expected to increase
the share price.
In addition to the argument that debt reduces WACC through tax
savings, corporate finance scholars provided another explanation for
how the heavy use of debt increases efficiency and value—namely,
by disciplining the otherwise free-spending ways of managements
running companies in mature industries with limited growth. When
formulating this argument in The American Economic Review in 1986,2
Michael Jensen wrote, “Thus debt reduces the agency costs of free
cash flow by reducing the cash flow available for spending at the
discretion of managers.” The presumption here is that management
would squander capital on value-destroying projects, so leverage
is needed to rein in capital spending, improve cost efficiency, and
drive superior performance. Many investors, analysts, and bankers
encourage companies to increase leverage to reduce their WACC,
and further to communicate their leverage policy to investors, with
the expectation that such steps will increase both the efficiency and
the long-run value of these companies.
But is this really what happens? With the aim of shedding some
light on this question, we undertook a study in which we started with
the 1,000 largest nonfinancial U.S. companies and eliminated those
without full financial and market data for 2001 through 2010, which
left us with 512 companies. We separately explored two subsets of
time—pre-crisis (2001–2007) and mid-crisis (2008–2010)—to see if we
could distinguish the effects of higher leverage during different points
in the economic and credit cycle. Simply sorting companies based on
leverage seemed to produce industry distortions, since some industries
tend to use significantly more debt than others. In fact, some of
the industries that delivered the highest TSR over the study period,
including food retailing, pharmaceuticals and biotechnology, software,
and technology hardware, also happen to be those that use less debt.
To avoid industry distortions, we compared companies within
each industry that carried above- and below-industry average leverage,
using three different measures, and then averaged the results.
The leverage measures were: (1) debt to debt plus the book value of
equity, (2) debt to debt plus the market value of equity, and (3) debt
to EBITDA. Over the full 10-year period, the companies with aboveaverage
leverage within their industry delivered 0.6% lower annualized
TSR. We repeated the analysis for 2008 through 2010, when credit
was less available, credit spreads were generally higher, and the heavy
use of debt was more punished by investors. As expected, we found
that highly leveraged companies performed even worse during this
tighter credit period by delivering annual TSR 1.7% lower than their
less-leveraged peers. As also expected, during the credit boom from
2004 through 2006, highly leveraged companies performed better,
with 1.2% higher TSR per year.
Over the full 10 years, then, leverage had a negative impact. Thus,
our findings may appear to contradict the common wisdom that
“leverage is beneficial for shareholders.” Does this imply that the
theory behind WACC and its impact on valuation is wrong? I do not
believe so, but there are reasons to believe that corporate managers
behave differently when carrying higher debt levels. For example,
those companies with higher debt delivered 3% lower median revenue
growth per year than the less-leveraged companies in the same industry.
One possible interpretation is that the growth opportunities of the
more highly leveraged companies are less profitable than the opportunities
faced by their less-leveraged counterparts. Perhaps that’s why
they have taken on more leverage, or possibly it’s the debt that leads
to management’s making fewer growth investments.
As discussed throughout this book, our capital market studies
have demonstrated a strong link between revenue growth and TSR
both for the market as a whole and for many specific industries—so at
least some of the more-leveraged companies in a given industry may
well be forgoing investments in profitable sales growth in order to
service their heavier debt. These companies and their shareholders
clearly would have been better off with less debt.
In other words, the association of higher leverage with lower TSR
has nothing to do with the effects of leverage on valuation per se—but
likely everything to do with how leverage affects the managers who have
to service that debt. For mature businesses with few opportunities for
profitable growth, heavy debt, as Jensen told us, is likely to add value
by putting the firm on a diet; that was a big part of the success of the
first wave of LBOs. But for the vast majority of companies that have
at least a decent array of promising growth opportunities, the use of
high leverage is quite likely to reduce value by forcing managements
to think twice about making even clearly value-adding investments.
In fairness to Jensen, in the middle of the 1980s LBO boom, it
seemed really obvious that many, if not most, companies were inefficient
and unproductive. In that environment, the discipline of debt
may have been more valuable than the drag of reduced growth. But
over the last few decades, the pendulum has swung, and now we
see many companies with extremely high rates of return that have
underperformed on growth—and leverage, as I suggested, seems to
have been part of this problem. For example, toward the end of 2018,
almost nine out of 10 of the largest 1,000 nonfinancial companies had
positive RCE, so with only about 10% of companies delivering negative
RCE, there are fewer companies today, as compared to the past,
that struggle to beat the cost of capital and would therefore benefit
from the discipline of debt.
Should companies increase leverage as a means of driving shareholder
value? We believe this only works in a limited number of cases
in which profitable reinvestment in the future is not readily available.
Sure, such temporarily higher debt levels to facilitate investment in
desirable growth opportunities can be beneficial, as long as there is
a clear plan plus a commitment to paying down that debt. But for
most companies, increasing leverage tends to make management
more conservative, which in turn tends to reduce the propensity to be
strategically opportunistic—something that is often required to deliver
valuable revenue growth. Leverage constricts revenue growth, which
leads to worse share-price performance, on average. So, notwithstanding
the potential benefits of leveraging up the balance sheet for very
mature companies, most companies would deliver better share-price
performance over time if they acted more prudently with the amount
of leverage they take on.
Putting Financial Policy into Practice
To operationalize these principles and research findings into actual
financial policies requires insights on a variety of business characteristics.
The starting point is always that financial policy should be
subordinated to business strategy and should be designed to help get
the most out of the available business opportunities.
Of course, less debt should be used in industries with highly variable
performance, due to either cyclicality or volatility. Companies
using business models that carry more fixed costs and have greater
capital requirements than their industry competitors should also
use less debt. But this prescription is often ignored when a company
replaces a more expensive outsourced service with an in-house capability
that, though providing cost and capital savings on average, may
also limit the firm’s ability to respond to downturns or other changes
in conditions.
As a general rule, the most important determinant of a company’s
capital structure should be the size and nature of its investment
opportunities. Of course, it may be difficult to quantify the size and
frequency of unexpected valuable investment opportunities, but it’s
important to recognize them, at least qualitatively. We don’t ever want
to have to turn down a significant value-creating opportunity because
we had too much debt at the time. For companies that come across
such unexpected opportunities more frequently, there is a higher value
to financial flexibility, and debt levels should be kept lower. By contrast,
in many commodity businesses where returns are rarely sustained well
above the required return, the opportunities that do materialize will
tend to carry lower NPVs, so there is less risk that high debt will lead
to missing out. Tech, in particular, is an industry where the ability to
deliver high returns is common, where new organic and acquisitive
investment prospects come along all the time, and, therefore, where
carrying less debt is desirable. More will be said on this in the final
section of this chapter.
Strategic Leasing
Some say that operating leases are really just a form of financing and
thus are not “strategic.” But leases can be strategic by virtue of the
option value they create; and when they are strategic, we want the
use of these business structures to be encouraged and, to reinforce
this, to be reflected in RCE.
Some CFOs and company treasurers avoid operating leases as
a matter of course. They claim that leases dilute EPS and EBITDA
and are merely expensive forms of financing that other companies
employ to artificially push assets off their balance sheets. Further,
they correctly point out that rating agencies and creditors recognize
this off-balance-sheet financing by determining the capital obligation
associated with minimum lease commitments.
Nevertheless, operating leases can be a more-efficient use of
capital and provide greater operating flexibility in many businesses.
In an uncertain business world, operating leases enable a company to
commit to only a portion of the life of an asset. They pay a “financing
premium” to do this; but if a portfolio of leases is managed
properly, with staggered expirations, the leases allow companies to
dial up and down the capital they employ in order to mitigate risk
at the bottom of a cycle. When times are tough, it’s much easier
to decide not to renew leases than to sell assets just when demand
for them has collapsed.
What’s more, many successful companies follow a strategy
of constantly refreshing their assets with newer versions. Having
updated assets can help companies maintain reliability while improving
customer experience and perception. Indeed, leases create an automatic
prompt for companies to consider upgrades on every renewal.
This can be an important consideration when leasing retail space,
automobiles, trucks, aircraft, and other assets.
To be sure, employing operating leases more aggressively tends
to reduce EBITDA. That’s clear in an industry like retail, where the
use of operating leases is substantial. In a study whose findings we
reported in “Can Leases Be Strategic,”3 we separated the 84 largest
retailers into high- and low-lease groups, based on the size of their
latest annual rent payment as a percentage of net property, plant,
and equipment. The median EBITDA of the high-lease group was
43% lower than it would be before rent (also known as EBITDAR,
which is earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization,
and rent). That’s a much larger reduction in EBITDA than the 23%
median decline of the low-lease group.
However, this hit to EBITDA was largely offset by how these
companies were valued. For the high-lease group, the median ratio of
enterprise value (market capitalization plus net debt) to EBITDA was
7.4x over the period, which was about 20% higher than the median
of 6.1x for the low-lease group. The lower EBITDA didn’t seem to
penalize valuation at all.
Several important considerations must be noted when a company
develops an effective operating-lease strategy. But first, it can forget
about the distinction between “on-balance-sheet” and “off-balancesheet.”
Indeed, accounting rules are likely to change soon, and all
leases with multiyear commitments will be put on the actual GAAP
balance sheet. Admittedly, this accounting change has been expected
for years, but it will happen at some point. Before and after such a
change to generally accepted accounting principles may occur, your
focus should be on comparing the capital commitment of a lease to
the purchase price of the asset. Signing a multiyear lease with minimum
required payments is scarcely different from borrowing money
to buy the asset and therefore committing to payments of interest
and principal. The operating lease is merely of a shorter duration, so
it’s like borrowing less money to buy a portion of the asset’s useful
life and only a portion of its benefits. Of course, in some situations
with scarce assets, it can be better to sign longer leases to ensure
access to the asset, but the approach makes these costs clear when
comparing tradeoffs.
To improve the comparability of companies that lease with those
that buy, Standard & Poor’s adjusts a company’s debt to include the
debt-equivalent value of its lease contracts by calculating the present
value of its lease commitments. This is a useful general approach for
companies to employ. For example, consider a company that leases
assets with a 30-year life and an underlying value of $10 million for
five years at a rate of 10% of the original underlying asset value per
year. Assuming the company has a marginal cost of debt of about 6%,
the present value of the five-year lease commitment is $4.2 million at
the outset. That is about 42% of the purchase commitment. And this
amount declines over the life of the lease as the remaining commitment
gets shorter.
This is strategically significant. The company could buy more than
twice as many assets for the same amount by committing to a shorter
period of use than the full life of the asset. For some companies, such
moves can help propel a growth strategy.
When confronted with this math in the 1990s, a retail client
in London told me, “If that’s how you will determine my capital
base, I will sign one-year leases with 24 one-year-renewal options”
rather than the standard 25-year leases that prevailed at the time
in London retail. Of course, if he could convince a lessor to agree
to such an arrangement, he would have full use of a store with the
right but not the obligation to walk away every year, which would
provide strategic flexibility and risk protection in downturns. Imagine
never having unused or underperforming capacity! Of course,
the lessor will want to charge a higher rent when giving away such
flexibility, and that’s where the tradeoff comes in. Luckily, RCE
treats the present value of lease commitments as an investment,
so it’s the perfect tool to measure this tradeoff and thereby make
an informed decision.
To make the best use of the strategic flexibility and maximize the
value created by leases, you need to structure a portfolio of leases to
expire gradually over time, rather than all at once. For example, if 20%
of the assets under five-year leases come up for renewal each year,
evenly spread over the quarters, you have an ongoing opportunity to
reduce capital by not replacing expiring leases when unexpected tough
times arrive. This tends to salvage more value than selling assets in
such tough times, since the resale values often decline then, as well.
Most operating leases last more than one year. But they can often
be structured so that the company must commit to only a portion
of the asset life, which is why the capital commitment is lower. The
implied interest rate embedded in leases often seems high compared
to borrowing rates, but this is simply the cost of the flexibility that
leases provide.
Yet, as we have learned, too much is no good. Like most things in
life, leases can be a problem if taken to an extreme. The annual cash fixed
charges are usually higher for leases than for owned assets. Companies
thus must be careful to limit the proportion of their assets under lease to
ensure that, through good times and bad, they haven’t taken on excessive
financial risk. Traditional debt and the implied debt equivalents of leases
must be considered together in setting the right financial policies. When
determining how far to push a lease strategy, be sure to prepare robust
scenario analyses to test the downside and see how the leases help or
hinder the situation when an unexpected crisis hits.
Are leases right for your company? Consider the types of assets,
the uniqueness, and the specialization of those assets and the frequency
with which you may want to replace or upgrade them. Also consider
industry cyclicality and volatility, because the optionality afforded by
leases has greater value when more peaks and valleys are likely to
occur in the business. Then think about this in the context of the lease
rates, durations, and covenants available, to determine whether leases
would be likely to provide significant strategic or financial benefits.
Many companies are likely to find that they should be leasing somewhat
more than they do now.
Dividend Policy
When do dividends truly matter?4 They have a positive effect on valuation
during a financial downturn and a negative effect when markets
are booming—but under normal circumstances, and on average, they
have little effect at all on shareholder returns.
Throughout the 2008–2009 financial crisis, there were substantially
fewer dividend increases and an abnormally large number of
dividend cuts. These generally stingy dividend policies were often in
response to a true liquidity crunch. But for many companies, dividend
prudence merely reflected general conservatism. As economic fears
subsided, managements evaluated whether reinstating or boosting
dividends would help their share price.
The dividend decision is difficult in the face of an abundance of
divergent views. In his celebrated paper “Do Dividends Really Matter?”5
the renowned Nobel Laureate Merton Miller argued that “the seeming
evidence that dividends do matter…is not to be trusted. It’s an
optical illusion.” He claimed that the apparent effect of dividends
on share prices is not caused by the dividends per se, but is merely
the market’s recognition of what the dividends communicate about
investment policy and future earnings trends. Given this, it would
seem an open-and-shut case that dividends don’t matter.
Then why the fuss? Many investors pester managements by
demanding new or increasing dividends. The investors cite studies
showing that high-dividend-yield stocks are better than low and
nondividend stocks at delivering TSR. A flurry of such recent studies
has attracted attention in the media and the boardroom. What should
management do?
It depends. Our capital market research on the dividend policies
of the largest 1,000 nonfinancial companies, excluding those that
were not public for the full decade of the 2000s, indicates that there
is no one-size-fits-all answer.
Our research shows that dividends do have a positive effect on
valuation during downturns, when economic confidence is low and
investors fear the worst, and thus prefer the cash in hand. But in
boom times investors have more confidence that companies will invest
their money wisely, so dividend hikes (or initiations) may actually be
interpreted as signs that investment opportunities are drying up. We
determined this by looking at valuation in terms of enterprise value
to gross operating assets and then compared this to the cash-oncash
return on capital. We found a strong correlation between these
measures of valuation and return, as documented in the article “Postmodern
Corporate Finance.” Some companies were valued higher
or lower than their returns alone would imply, so we tested whether
dividends influenced this premium or discount. From 2004 through
2007, a majority of companies trading at a premium were nondividend
payers. This flipped from the first quarter of 2008 through 2009, when
a majority of companies trading at a premium were dividend payers.
Do some companies’ share prices benefit more from dividends?
If so, when do dividends really matter? In principle, investors should
prefer higher dividends from companies with few desirable investment
opportunities, so that the investors can redeploy the capital
elsewhere. And companies with an abundance of desirable growth
opportunities can probably create more value than the investors can, so
logically they should maintain low or no dividends. From the outside,
however, we can’t assess the quality of investment opportunities, so
we characterize companies by the returns and revenue growth they
have generated historically.
We evaluated average cash-on-cash returns over the 2000s to
separate companies into high-, medium-, and low-return groups.
We then divided each of these groups, based on whether a company
experienced revenue growth above or below the 8.1% median annualized
revenue growth for the full sample. Each company was classified
as a nondividend payer, a low payer, or a high payer, depending on
whether it was below or above the median dividend as a percentage
of after-tax operating cash flow.
Regardless of return, the companies with low revenue growth
delivered higher TSR if they paid a dividend. The size of the dividend
did not matter much, but paying a dividend was better than not. This
effect was most significant for the group that was low on both growth
and return, where both low- and high-dividend payers delivered median
TSR that was a whopping 13.7% higher than the nondividend payers.
For the medium-return group, the high-dividend payers delivered 6.9%
more TSR per year than nondividend payers, and for those with high
returns this difference was 3.5%. In sum, dividends seem to help the
share prices of all low-growth companies, but the benefit is larger for
low-return companies than for those with high returns.
This pattern reverses for high-revenue-growth companies.
Comparing the high payers to the nondividend payers, the TSR gaps
for the high-, medium-, and low-return groups were –0.7%, –3.6%,
and –0.5%, respectively. For high-growth companies there seems to
be a drag on TSR from paying dividends, though the data is more
scattered since company-specific circumstances vary more.
So, what are the implications for managements contemplating
dividend policy? First, recognize that changes to dividend policy will be
heavily scrutinized by investors, analysts, and the media. But that’s no
reason to avoid desirable changes. Also, remember that your reinvestment
rate and future earnings stream will influence your share price
more over time than your dividends, so keep your capital deployment
priorities straight. Given the research, here are some guidelines:
• If your company doesn’t earn the required return, and you expect
growth to be lower than 8% per year, then your company should
absolutely pay a dividend.
• Even if your company does earn a high return, if you are not
growing rapidly, then your TSR would probably benefit from
paying a dividend.
• If you expect to grow rapidly, dividends may constrain your
TSR, particularly if they consume cash you could have invested
in profitable growth. This is even true, though less so, if your
returns are currently below the required return.
Consider your prospects for deploying capital in high-return investments
over the next few years. If the amount of expected investment is
a large percentage of the cash you generate, you should be less inclined
to initiate or increase dividends. But recognize that, if you have had
returns that have fallen persistently below the required return, your
share price may be penalized if you don’t pay a large-enough dividend.
For companies with fewer desirable future investments, dividends
should be more attractive. But if you have been aggressively investing
in growth and have delivered returns well in excess of the required
return, a dividend increase may hurt the share price. That’s because
investors may conclude that you have run out of desirable investments.
If you are on the fence, then more-modest dividend policies may
be warranted, since this will leave more cash available for reinvestment
in future growth.
Cash Balances
With the backdrop of record-setting repatriation of international cash
balances in the wake of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, shareholders,
analysts, and pundits are all up in arms about corporate America’s
ballooning cash balances, and are demanding share repurchases to
make productive use of the cash. Oddly, managements sometimes
get more questions from investors about what they plan to do with
idle cash balances than about strategy and operating performance.
Should managements listen to their shareholders and distribute cash
balances? Should they disgorge the financial slack, or is the flexibility
it provides more valuable than any drag on performance of holding
the cash?
A number of strong arguments can be made in favor of cash
distributions. Often, having a surplus of cash can take the pressure
off and make executives less forceful in driving cost efficiency and
capital productivity. Reducing the financial cushion can heighten the
urgency for them to streamline operations and management processes
in order to purge waste and eliminate unneeded activities. We have all
witnessed this in our personal lives. When times are good, we spend
on things that are not necessities; when times are tight, we avoid such
purchases. That’s fine when we’re doing it with our own money and
realizing the benefits for ourselves. But when working with other
people’s money, we should have zero incentive to spend wastefully,
whether it’s deliberate or inadvertent.
The more financial slack a company has, the more investors worry
about how prudent management will be in making investments.
When money is tight, the burden of bad investments is quickly and
sharply felt. But when cash is abundant, there is less sensitivity to
such outcomes. Distributing cash reduces these perceptions of the
risk of inefficient reinvestment. And reducing cash imposes the need
for management to go to the market to raise capital for investments,
which provides a market test of the validity of their investment strategy.
Can management convince outside investors of the merit of its
investment plan?
The buyback is used more and more to distribute excess cash and
yet, as discussed in chapter 8, the beauty of many buybacks is only
skindeep. Despite surface appearances, our extensive capital market
research at Fortuna Advisors has led us to conclude that a majority
of repurchases are less attractive than they appear. Most companies
would be better off either investing more in their business or holding
the cash to wait for potential investment opportunities. If they
do want to distribute cash, ordinary and special dividends tend to
be more effective over the business cycle, since there is no price risk.
Integrated Financial Policy Decisions
So, what’s a management team to do? They will ask themselves:
Should we have more or less debt? More or less cash? How aggressively
should we use leases? Should we pay dividends? And should
we buy back stock?
The same financial flexibility arguments that apply to capital
structure also relate to all elements of financial policy, so there is a
consistent theme throughout this chapter. Corporate financial policies
for target leverage, cash balances, leases, dividends, and share
repurchases should not be the inadvertent outcome of a series of
haphazard “insights,” such as “the leases looked cheap” or “in the
one-on-one meeting, investors told us they’d like us to increase our
buybacks.” Instead, financial policy should be deliberately and holistically
designed to maximize value in the context of the chosen corporate
business strategy as well as the desirability, size, and timing of
investment opportunities.
For a stable company with limited or predictable investment
opportunities, financial flexibility is not particularly valuable. So, it
would be appropriate to institute more aggressive leverage, cash, and
distribution policies. But too often, management puts its company
in this category when in fact the company has peers that are making
successful large investments in their future. If a company has sizable
growth investment opportunities despite uncertain timing, more flexibility
may be required. Such situations dictate lower leverage, higher
cash balances, and less distribution to shareholders.
Operating leases should be used when their option value is strategically
worthwhile. If a company typically buys assets in a highly
regular pattern and uses them well past their depreciation life, then it
probably should continue to buy them. Using debt to purchase assets
is cheaper than leases in such cases. But if a company faces cyclicality
and volatility such that the option to not renew leases from time to
time would be valuable, then operating leases that commit to only a
portion of the asset life would be better. As discussed above, it’s critical
that the lease expirations be staggered so that in each quarter and each
year there will be some leases that can be cancelled (not renewed),
thereby pushing the asset risk back on the lessor. Another important
consideration is whether assets tend to be replaced before they are
fully depreciated. When this is the case, it reinforces the benefits of
operating leases as a meaningful part of the capital structure.
One thing is abundantly evident: Companies need to fully integrate
their capital allocation and financial policies with their corporate strategy.
This holistic view of strategy, capital allocation, and financial policy
should be clearly communicated to the market, and companies should
target investors who value their strategy appropriately. In the absence
of a clearly defined corporate and financial strategy, investors will likely
be skeptical or even fearful that the company will misuse its cash at
the expense of shareholders. In such cases, the stock price is likely to
fall, and investors are likely to demand their capital be returned, so
that they can redeploy it elsewhere.
Notes
1 Gregory V. Milano and Joseph Theriault, “Is Financial Leverage Good for Shareholders?,”
CFO.com, April 13, 2012, accessed January 15, 2019, http://ww2.cfo.
com/capital-markets/2012/04/is-financial-leverage-good-for-shareholders/.
2 Michael C. Jensen and Richard A. Posner, “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow,
Corporate Finance, and Takeovers,” American Economic Review, May 1986.
3 Gregory V. Milano, “Can Operating Leases Be Strategic?,” CFO.com, March 15,
2012, accessed January 15, 2019, http://ww2.cfo.com/management-accounting/
2012/03/can-operating-leases-be-strategic/.
4 Gregory V. Milano, “When Do Dividends Really Matter?,” CFO.com, April
1, 2011, accessed January 15, 2019, http://ww2.cfo.com/banking-capitalmarkets/
2011/04/when-do-dividends-really-matter/.
5 Merton H. Miller, “Do Dividends Really Matter?,” Selected paper No. 57, Graduate
School of Business, University of Chicago.