SOMEONE ONCE EXPLAINED to me that he had identified
over 400 key business performance indicators. This, of course, calls
into question how “key” each of these indicators is. If 399 of the
metrics increase and one declines, what does it mean? If the one is
sales growth, and it drops significantly, it could be pretty bad despite
the other 399 indicators’ being positive or neutral. Alternatively, if
most of the metrics decline, but a few key ones rise, it could still be a
pretty good outcome for the company. If, say, 223 measures rise and
177 decline—or some more balanced mix like that—what does this tell
you? The point is that when there are too many metrics, the picture
becomes muddled. We need a hierarchy that allows us to balance
various inputs in order to optimize a decisive measure.
When it comes to performance measurement, corporate finance
executives tend to layer measures on top of measures to ensure that
nothing escapes measurement. Don’t do it—the use of too many
measures will distort the signals needed to make decisions. If you
managed a baseball team, you’d view success in a game as winning,
not producing runs or limiting opponents’ runs. If all you cared about
was runs scored, would you be happier with a 1–0 win or a 7–9 loss?
What about team batting average? The ratio of strikes to balls of your
pitchers? Number of errors? All these matter, but only to the extent
that they help you win.
As conveyed in chapter 3, the performance measure that best
indicates success in terms of value creation is Residual Cash Earnings,
or RCE. When RCE rises, value is created because the increase in cash
earnings exceeds the required return on incremental investment. Even
moving from a negative RCE to a less-negative RCE creates value by
destroying less.
Let’s use this insight to reconsider the sales decline example above.
In most cases, when a sales growth rate declines from 8% to –5%,
it’s not good. But sales growth alone isn’t what’s important—it’s the
change in RCE. Using the example in figure 11, we see that value
can be created by shrinking revenue, as long as the lost revenue was
destroying value. Perhaps the company did a thorough analysis of RCE
by customer (as will be discussed in chapter 9) and found a group of
customers who were contributing negative RCE. By discontinuing business
relations with these value-destroying customers, we forgo sales
and Gross Cash Earnings. But so much capital was tied up—perhaps
in woefully underutilized production capacity, inventory, accounts
receivable, and collateral—that the RCE contribution was negative.
When the contracts are discontinued, sales drop by $50 million and
GCE declines by $5 million, which is determined after considering
the effects of such reductions on fixed as well as variable costs.
$millions Prior Year - Discontinued
Contracts = Current Year
Sales 1,000 (50) 950 ↓
Sales Growth -5.0%
Gross Cash Earnings (GCE) 300 (10) 290 ↓
GCE Margin 30.0% 20.0% 30.5%
Gross Operating Assets 2,000 (400) 1,600 ↓
Asset Intensity 2.00x 8.00x 1.68x
Gross Business Return 15.0% 2.5% 18.1% ↑
Capital Charge @8% (160) 32 (128)
Residual Cash Earnings (RCE) 140 22 162 ↑
RCE Margin 14.0% n/a 17.1%
ΔRCE 22 √
Year 1: Shrinking Revenue by Discontinuing Customer Contracts
with Low Margins and High Asset Intensity
Figure 11—Eliminating Unprofitable Customers
Since firing customers can be a tough sell to managers, a more
tactful approach can be to raise prices and let customers decide if
they want to continue transacting at this higher price. This method,
of course, curbs demand and can recalibrate the RCE equation to
yield a positive output.
The critical result in figure 11 is that fully $400 million of Gross
Operating Assets disappears; when this happens, returns go up by
3% and, more important, RCE rises by $22 million. The company is
better off without these customers—let someone else who is simply
focused on earnings serve them. Although this is a hypothetical
example, it is a situation that many companies find themselves in.
Unfortunately, some companies are so consumed with concerns
about growth and absorbing fixed costs that they can’t bring themselves
to say no to the client or adjust pricing to spur customer attrition.
They are understandably proud of their historical growth track
record and are unwilling to tell investors that sales have declined.
But regular reviews of customer profitability and proactive pruning
of customers that destroy value are both essential to delivering
continuous improvement in RCE.
Let’s imagine now that this same company uses the freed-up
capital to invest in organic and acquisitive growth the following
year. As shown in figure 12, it invests a total of $1.4 billion in highly
asset-intensive and high-margin activities that deliver incremental
revenue of $250 million and Gross Cash Earnings of $160 million.
The Gross Business Return on this investment is 11.4%, which is
lower than the 18.1% of the existing business but well above the
required return of 8%. This drives RCE up by $48 million, but drags
the Gross Business Return down from 18.1% to 15.0%. Although
the opening paragraph of this chapter indicates that a decline in
returns is usually not great, in this case it’s a good thing; the return
on the incremental investment, at 11.4%, is higher than the required
return of 8%, even if not as high as the existing business. RCE helps
us peer through the muddle of figures and metrics to see whether
value has been created.
$ millions Prior Year - Discontinued
Contracts = Current Year
Sales 950 250 1,200
Sales Growth 26.3%
Gross Cash Earnings (GCE) 290 160 450
GCE Margin 30.5% 64.0% 37.5% ↓
Gross Operating Assets 1,600 1,400 3,000
Asset Intensity 1.68x 5.60x 2.50x
Gross Business Return 18.1% 11.4% 15.0% ↓
Capital Charge @8% (128) (112) (240)
Residual Cash Earnings (RCE) 162 48 210 ↑
RCE Margin 17.1% 19.2% 17.5%
ΔRCE 48 √
Year 2: Growing by Investing in Positive RCE Projects with
Lower Gross Business Returns
Figure 12—Reinvesting in Positive RCE Projects
It is helpful in business to have several performance drivers in
the scorecard. This way we can readily assess why RCE increases or
decreases. Over the years, my colleagues at Fortuna Advisors and I
developed what we call the Five Tools of Value Creation. It’s a take-off
on the five-tool baseball player who can hit for average, hit for power,
run the bases with speed, throw accurately, and field his position.
Three of our five tools drive current value creation (current ΔRCE).
The other two provide reliable indicators of how well the company
is preparing for and investing in future value creation (indicators of
future ΔRCE).
Three Tools that Drive Current Value Creation
Three measures, when viewed in combination, can provide a complete,
fundamental picture of why RCE changes. But, again, each only
represents one facet of performance and must be combined with the
other two in order to determine if the net effect is desirable—that is,
produces higher RCE. The three measures are sales growth, Gross
Cash Earnings Margin (GCE Margin or GCM), and Gross Operating
Asset Intensity (or asset intensity). GCE Margin is an indicator
of P&L efficiency and pricing power, while asset intensity reflects
capital productivity. Together with the required return, these three
measures are sufficient to understand why RCE increased or decreased
during the year.
Consider a business with $1 million of sales last year, a GCE
Margin of 30%, and asset intensity of 2.00x. What was its RCE last year?
Assume an 8% required return. These are the steps to work this out:
Step 1. Calculate Gross Cash Earnings, which is sales of
$1 million multiplied by the 30% GCE Margin, or
$300,000.
Step 2. Calculate Gross Operating Assets, which is sales of
$1 million multiplied by asset intensity of 2.00x, or
$2 million.
Step 3. Determine the Capital Charge, which is the 8%
required return multiplied by the $2 million of Gross
Operating Assets, or $160,000.
Step 4. Calculate RCE by subtracting the $160,000 Capital
Charge from the Gross Cash Earnings of $300,000,
which yields an RCE of $140,000.
We have just calculated the base year in the first column of figure
11. Now comes the fun part: In the first year after the base year, sales
declines 5% to $950,000, which in and of itself seems bad. But GCE
Margin rises from 30.0% to 30.5%, and asset intensity declines from
2.00x to 1.68x, which both seem positive on a stand-alone basis. A lower
asset intensity implies less investment and, therefore, a lower capital
charge per dollar of revenue. With growth moving against us while
margin and asset intensity move in our favor, we need some way to
determine if this change in performance will add or subtract value.
Of course, we use RCE. We follow the same math to determine the
RCE in year 1 and the change in RCE from the base year.
Step 1. Calculate Gross Cash Earnings, which is sales of
$950,000 multiplied by the 30.5% GCE Margin, or
$290,000, which is a decline from the base year.
Step 2. Calculate Gross Operating Assets, which is sales of
$950,000 multiplied by asset intensity of 1.68x, or
$1.6 million.
Step 3. Determine the Capital Charge, which is the 8%
required return multiplied by the $1.6 million of
Gross Operating Assets, or $128,000.
Step 4. Calculate RCE by subtracting the $128,000 Capital
Charge from the Gross Cash Earnings of $290,000.
RCE is $162,000, which is an increase of $22,000 of
RCE over the base year.
The same math can be applied to the year 2 information in figure
12. The benefits of 26.3% growth and an increase in GCE Margin to
37.5% are tempered when asset intensity jumps to 2.50x, but the net
RCE effect remains positive. So, it’s good!
Ultimately, what matters is the increase in RCE. But Revenue
Growth, GCE Margin, and asset intensity all help diagnose RCE’s
movements, as well as inform our strategy to improve RCE. One
client hadn’t paid a lot of attention to its balance sheet before we
were engaged. While Revenue Growth and GCE Margin looked
decent, each year the asset intensity, already high, was increasing.
In the end, the increase in the capital charge more than offset
the improvements in Gross Cash Earnings, so RCE declined. We
collaborated to determine that their capacity utilization had been
declining as they added new technology assets without selling or
disposing of the older assets that were being replaced. They also
had been virtually giving away contract terms, including extended
payment terms, to secure new orders. Without any price adjustment
for the lenient terms, working capital ballooned, which
dragged down RCE.
We collaborated with the client to develop a plan to improve
asset productivity by better managing capacity, shedding idle assets,
negotiating contract terms with greater care, and using a series of
other tactics designed to better balance Revenue Growth, GCE Margin,
and asset intensity. In each of the next three years, RCE improved,
along with the share price.
This lack of concern for capital productivity is common and a
real drag on value creation. A different client had a habit of hoarding
assets for use as collateral to borrow against. We explained that if they
monetized the assets by selling them or, in the case of accounts receivable,
collecting them, they wouldn’t need the loan in the first place.
Some have asked why I use asset intensity instead of one of the
more commonly used asset turnover measures. A solid link has been
established between GCE Margin and asset intensity in determining
the RCE Margin, which tells us the average RCE contribution of each
dollar of sales. In the first example above, if we multiply the 2.00x
asset intensity by the 8% required return, we calculate the capital
charge as a percentage of sales, as shown in figure 13.
Dollars Margin
Sales 1,000
Gross Cash Earnings (GCE) 300 30.0%
l
Gross Operating Assets 2,000 l
Asset Intensity 2.00x l
Capital Charge @8% (160) (16%)
l
Residual Cash Earnings (RCE) 140 14.0%
x 8% l
Figure 13—Asset Intensity and Margins
In this case it’s 16% (i.e., 2 Î 8% = 16%), which can be subtracted
from the GCE Margin of 30% to determine the RCE Margin of 14%.
The capital charge as a percentage of sales sets the minimum GCE
margin needed to have positive RCE. Said differently, there is a maximum
asset intensity that sets the RCE break-even, given a particular
level of GCE margin.
As will be discussed in chapter 7, the RCE Margin, or RCM,
combines the GCE Margin and asset intensity tools and indicates
the RCE of each dollar of sales growth. This makes it a perfect tool
for evaluating the tradeoff between growth and capital productivity
when determining a strategic position. The higher the RCM, the
more valuable each dollar of sales, and the more a company should
invest to fuel growth. More on that later.
Two Tools that Drive Future Value Creation
In early 2011, a client situation prompted me to develop a new
way to measure future investment. I detailed this new method in
an article entitled “Are You Reinvesting Enough?” in CFO magazine.
1 The client faced desirable investment opportunities, but the
CFO chose not to cut her substantial share repurchase program
to fund the new investments. Instead, she decided to finance
the new outlay by slashing investments in two other businesses,
both of which were growing well and earning strong returns.
So, she missed an opportunity to step up the rate at which the
company profitably reinvests, which would have driven its share
price higher over time.
My article introduced the concept of the “Reinvestment Rate,”
which quantifies the percentage of Gross Cash Earnings that is reinvested
in the business. To calculate the reinvestment rate, add capital
expenditures, acquisitions, research and development, and other investments
(including changes in working capital), and divide that sum
by Gross Cash Earnings. Top-line growth is, obviously, an important
driver of TSR, as has been discussed. What may be less intuitive is
that sustained growth is typically the result of having a higher reinvestment
rate. My colleagues and I have studied the overall market
and many sectors and industries, and have consistently found that
the companies with the highest reinvestment rates have delivered
higher median compound annual growth rates (CAGR) in revenue.
In the original article, our research study sample was the largest 1,000
nonfinancial U.S. companies, excluding those that were not public for
the full decade ending in 2009.
It may be easy to see that high reinvestment rates drive more
revenue growth. However, is value really being created? Our capital
market research has demonstrated time and again that the highest
reinvestment-rate companies typically deliver better TSR. In the
original study, the benefits of reinvestment are so significant that
over 200 of the 277 companies that reinvested more than 100% of
their cash flow for the full decade delivered higher TSR than the
median of the 0%–50% reinvestment group. This outperformance
by high-reinvestment companies is particularly noteworthy, considering
the tough economic environment of the decade ending in 2009.
Because the reinvestment rate is an important driver of TSR, we
made it the fourth tool of what eventually became the Five Tools of
Value Creation. The goal is not to maximize the rate of return, but
rather to balance the pursuit of higher returns with adequate reinvestments
to fuel business growth. Although larger companies may
find it difficult to match the reinvestment rates of small companies,
many large companies would benefit from a higher reinvestment rate,
even if the average rate of return declines (as in the Oracle example
shown in figure 10 in the previous chapter).
Our research findings indicate that this is not a superficial stock
market effect whereby investors arbitrarily assign higher multiples to
high-reinvestment companies. In fact, it is quite the contrary. While
high reinvestment typically boosts TSR over time, it does not increase
average price-to-earnings multiples or enterprise value-to-EBITDA
multiples. Nor does high reinvestment boost valuation at a point
in time. Instead, it drives value appreciation over time by improving
growth prospects, and usually RCE, too. Unfortunately, in an
odd paradox, executives who are too fixated on current valuation
multiples usually seek to maintain their current strong operating
metrics. To avoid risk they tend to underinvest, which limits stock
upside.
Indeed, most executives at companies with low reinvestment rates
understand and agree with our research findings that high reinvestment
rates add value. But many claim they don’t have sufficient opportunities
for profitable reinvestment. One CFO defended his position by stating
that he “never turns down positive net-present-value investments.”
But on closer inspection, we found that the company’s culture and
internal processes together put excessive emphasis on avoiding bad
investments. For upper middle-level managers, there appeared to be
an asymmetry between reward for success and punishment for failure:
the managers tended to feel they received only small amounts of praise
for good investment outcomes, but major disciplining for bad ones.
This asymmetry comes on top of, and no doubt reinforces, a
natural behavioral bias known as “loss-aversion.” When coupled
with processes that disproportionately punish losses, this encourages
indecision and inaction. It also leads to less experimentation,
even in situations where the costs are relatively small and the benefits
potentially large.
Such risk-averse corporate cultures are common. Given these
internal and external influences, all but the highest-return investments
are habitually shelved. In many companies, arbitrarily tight
capital expenditure budgets set a strategic tone of restraint that, in
turn, sets the bar very high for operating managers. And because
of this tendency of these “high-return cultures” to produce low
reinvestment-rate outcomes, such cultures need to change if top
executives want to provide adequate support and incentive for desirable
growth investments.
But is the reinvestment rate likely to be more valuable for companies
that are already earning high internal cash-on-cash operating
returns than for companies with low returns? In our research, we
found that whether you have high, medium, or low returns, TSR
is positively related to higher rates of reinvestment. As we would
expect, however, high-return companies get a larger benefit from
reinvestment than low-return companies. On the other hand, lowerreturn
companies need to be more careful since their success rate
with reinvestment—a subject to be discussed in detail later—tends
to be lower than for high-return companies.
Some may question the causality in our findings that highreinvestment
companies typically achieve higher revenue growth
and higher TSR. Are the successful companies the only ones that
can afford to reinvest more? Do the “good” industries skew the data,
making reinvestment appear desirable for all? We have conducted
extensive research in our client studies of their individual industries,
including healthcare, industrial, energy, technology, and other
sectors. The results are consistent across the board.
Hard question: Are you reinvesting enough? Management
teams should assess their companies’ reinvestment rates both
on an ongoing basis and as part of the annual planning process.
During this process, they should consider capital expenditures,
R&D, marketing, and even acquisitions as means of building future
value. It also helps if they examine the reinvestment rates across
different business units to see if enough reinvestment is occurring
where the returns and opportunities are highest. More on this in
chapter 9.
A few practical steps can be taken to ensure that the reinvestment
rate remains at the level likely to maximize value. Most important, try
to create a culture in which positive feedback on investment success
is at least as strong as negative feedback on unsuccessful investment.
Recognize that a willingness to fail is essential if you want managers
to invest in clearly valuable projects despite facing uncertain conditions.
And in performance reports and analyses, avoid measuring
investments as a percentage of sales. Instead, be sure to measure and
discuss the reinvestment rate as a percentage of Gross Cash Earnings,
which is “pre-investment” cash flow. By thus linking reinvestment with
cash profitability, management effectively signals and reinforces their
company’s intent to invest heavily in its most profitable businesses.
For a few years we were content to use just four tools of value
creation—until we ran into a challenge when evaluating a certain
client’s financial and share price performance. The client had strong
RCE that stemmed from a desirable combination of a high GCE
Margin and relatively low asset intensity, both in comparison to peers.
Some of the company’s businesses offered products at premium prices
that provided a big boost to GCE Margin. Other of its businesses used
advanced manufacturing processes that enabled them to achieve their
sales volumes with substantially less capital invested than peers, which
provided an asset-intensity advantage. Overall, when the company’s
high RCE Margin was multiplied by its fairly large sales figure, management
was producing a very high level of RCE—one measured in
billions of dollars.
What’s more, the company had an industry-leading reinvestment
rate, which, as discussed above, tends to lead to strong revenue growth
as well as TSR. The client seemed to invest more as a percentage
of GCE than any of its competitors. Yet, despite all these signs of
success, its top-line growth was anemic. Its managers were investing
billions and seemingly getting little for it. It became clear that their
investments weren’t very effective.
While looking for a simple way to evaluate and portray this aspect
of performance, we came up with our fifth and final tool of value
creation. We started by considering some version of incremental
return on investment, but RCE and the three drivers of current value
creation already told us pretty much everything we need to know
about incremental returns. Our aim was to capture a distinct and
new aspect of performance—one that was not being reflected in the
other four tools.
In the end, we developed a simple measure we called Reinvestment
Effectiveness, defined as the three-year increment of sales (measured
in dollars) as a percentage of the amount of investment in capital
expenditures, R&D, marketing, acquisitions, and working capital
(also measured in dollars). In other words, how many dollars of sales
growth are you getting per dollar of investment?
A “minimum acceptable” rate of Reinvestment Effectiveness
can be determined as a function of the GCE Margin. The formula is
simply the required return divided by the GCE Margin. A company
with a GCE Margin of 15% and a required return of 10% must have
Reinvestment Effectiveness of at least 67% (10%/15%) to generate
enough sales and GCE to overcome the incremental capital charge. To
check this, assume we invest $150,000 at Reinvestment Effectiveness
of 67%, so the incremental sales are $100,000. Since the incremental
GCE is 15%, GCE is $15,000, which is equal to the capital charge (10%
of the $150,000 investment). At a Reinvestment Effectiveness above
67%, the investment would drive RCE higher; below this level, RCE
would decline, since the incremental GCE would be less than the
incremental capital charge.
Having told you this, it’s important that I also stress that there is
no precise answer to how much Reinvestment Effectiveness is enough.
Companies with exceptionally high RCE Margins can get by with a
Reinvestment Effectiveness of 0.30x or even 0.25x; companies with
lower RCE Margins will need a much higher Reinvestment Effectiveness
to drive improvements in RCE.
Now, let’s consider Amazon again, as we did in chapter 2. Over
the five years through 2017, Amazon had reinvested a whopping $99
billion back into the business, which is a 94% reinvestment rate when
divided by the cumulative Gross Cash Earnings over the period. Its
largest investment category was $67 billion in R&D, followed by $32
billion in capital expenditures and $14 billion in acquisitions—primarily
the Whole Foods acquisition. Offsetting these investments was a
reduction in operating net working capital of $14 billion. Note that
Amazon actually invested $113 billion but had $14 billion of it funded
by structuring its operating working capital policies such that current
liabilities are increasingly worked off more quickly than its current
assets are replaced. In other words, it gets paid before it pays—and
that helps fund its growth investments. Its working capital policies
effectively paid for Whole Foods!
Amazon’s reinvestment rate is above the median rate for the S&P
500 over this period. But to see how well Amazon has performed, we
must look at the company’s reinvestment effectiveness. During this
period, its revenue increased by $117 billion, which, when divided by the
investment of $99 billion, implies a reinvestment effectiveness of 118%.
In summary, Amazon has been reinvesting 94% of its Gross Cash
Earnings back into the business; it had a reinvestment effectiveness
of 118%; and its RCE Margin has averaged 14.1% over the five-year
period. It’s no wonder that its RCE increased more than fivefold
from $5.4 billion in 2012 to $27.7 billion in 2017. During this period,
Amazon’s five-year TSR was 366%, or 3.4 times the 107% TSR of the
SPY ETF that tracks the S&P 500.
Some say, “Sure, Amazon invests a lot—but will they ever generate
a profit?” Indeed, Amazon seems to be a valuation conundrum to
those who follow accounting net-income and EPS trends. Some say
it is unprofitable; irrational investors are simply wowed by its story
and its service. It’s easy to see how those who cherish EPS statistics
can draw such conclusions from graphs like that in figure 14.
Even in 2017, as the company’s EPS finally turned meaningfully
positive, its average price-to-earnings multiple, using daily share prices
and the last four quarters of reported EPS, averaged over 200x. Many
observers see that as one of the biggest con jobs of our time. Such
a view, which continues to be widespread even to this day, remains
in thrall to the myth of EPS and accounting convention; and in so
doing, it has completely missed one of the most remarkable episodes
of value creation in our time.
But when looking through the RCE lens, we see Amazon’s massive
R&D expenditures as investments, and we also view its heavy capital
expenditures on a cash basis. With these two simple alterations to
basic accounting practices, we see the true value that Amazon is creating.
It isn’t unprofitable at all! In fact, it is hugely profitable; it’s just
that it is reinvesting most of its profits back into the business, and a
large proportion of those investments are in a form that accountants
require to be expensed. This preponderance of expensed investments
makes it harder for investors to understand the profitability. But such
investments also end up providing a massive tax shelter, as contrasted
with investments in capital equipment, for example, where the tax
benefits are usually realized more gradually, over time.
-$200
$0
$200
$400
$600
$800
$1,000
$1,200
$1,400
$1,600
$1,800
$2,000
$2,200
-$20.00
$0.00
$20.00
$40.00
$60.00
$80.00
$100.00
$120.00
$140.00
$160.00
$180.00
$200.00
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Share Price
EPS
Price and EPS for Amazon.com, Inc.
EPS
Actual Share Price
Figure 14—Price vs. EPS for Amazon
Let’s pause for a moment and explain the RCE framework for
valuation. Valuation through the RCE lens is based on a methodology
similar to discounted cash flow. Enterprise value is estimated as
Gross Operating Assets (GOA) plus the present value of RCE. When
RCE is zero, no value is being created or destroyed, and estimated
enterprise value equals Gross Operating Assets, no more and no less.
When RCE is positive, the enterprise value is expected to rise as the
company delivers returns above the required return demanded by
investors—and value is destroyed by companies and their investments
in which RCE is negative. One simple way to come up with an estimate
of the present value of RCE is to capitalize RCE as if investors were
pricing in a future in which RCE remains at the current level. Moreover,
when calculated across the full market, such simple estimates
of enterprise value based on capitalized RCE correlate remarkably
well with actual enterprise values.
How does this work for Amazon? As shown in figure 15, the
share price has tracked Amazon’s RCE-implied share price quite well.
$0
$200
$400
$600
$800
$1,000
$1,200
$1,400
$1,600
$1,800
$2,000
$2,200
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Share Price
RCE Implied Share Price for Amazon.com, Inc.
GOA-Net Debt per Share
Capitalized RCE per Share
Actual Share Price
Figure 15—RCE Implied Share Price for Amazon.com
There is no con job—Amazon has in fact created significant value,
and the market has recognized it. At times, the share price has been
a bit below the price implied by RCE; at other times it has been a
bit above it. It’s natural for there to be expectations of improving or
declining RCE when positive or negative news surfaces. But, over time,
investors have generally followed the capitalized RCE valuation pretty
well—even before RCE was created, which is an important point. It’s
not that thousands of investors are out there calculating RCE. Not
at all. But savvy investors do care about growth, margin, and asset
intensity. They prefer cash flow to profits, and they do see R&D as an
investment in the long-term growth, viability, and cash generating
capacity of the business. RCE captures each of these performance
attributes in one easily calculated measure. This is what gives us
confidence that if a company grows its RCE, its share price is likely
to rise, even if its EPS doesn’t.
Bringing Together the Five Tools of Value Creation
We designed the Five Tools of Value Creation to capture the aspects
of financial performance that drive share prices in as simple a framework
as possible. We don’t need 400 key performance indicators; we
just need five. Current value, or simply ΔRCE, is driven by revenue
growth, GCE Margin (also known as Gross Cash Margin or GCM),
and asset intensity. Future value is driven by the reinvestment rate
and Reinvestment Effectiveness. The goal is to drive positive ΔRCE
through the Five Tools of Value Creation, with reinvestment, innovation,
excellence, and a long-term focus. The relationship of these
measures is shown in figure 16.
Five Tools
(Scorecard)
Revenue
Growth
Gross Cash
Margin
Asset
Intensity
Reinvestment
Rate
Reinvestment
Effectiveness
ΔRCE
Valuation
Multiple
Value Creation
/ Share
• Differentiation
• Profitable growth
• Sustainability
• Risk
RCE
Margin
Figure 16—The Five Tools of Value Creation
We help our clients customize the five tools and then, in performance
scorecards and planning documents, show how they feed into
and help evaluate both RCE and ΔRCE. With one client, we asked how
they could expect to generate their forecasted growth with what was
a particularly meager capex budget. The company would have needed
twice their peak historical Reinvestment Effectiveness to achieve its
planned growth for the investment. To be fair, in some cases a new type
of investment is conceived, with much higher or lower Reinvestment
Effectiveness, and in other cases there is meaningful underutilized
capacity that can support growth. But at the very least, Reinvestment
Effectiveness helps managements consider whether they are making
logically consistent predictions.
The interaction of the five tools can be insightful in many other
ways, too. For example, in the case of another client, growth was
slowing but they were still investing heavily in the future. Reinvestment
Effectiveness had dropped off, which suggested a need
for reevaluation. It turned out that many of the new investments
supported products that were more differentiated and expected to
have higher GCE Margins than the baseline company average. So,
when we considered how this other key variable was interacting
with the lower Reinvestment Effectiveness, we were able to determine
that such investments would be adequate to still drive RCE
improvements.
A decline in Reinvestment Effectiveness can sometimes be acceptable.
An example is when a company has a high concentration of
new acquisitions that cost relatively more than past organic investments
per unit of growth. This can still be value-increasing, if it
provides sufficient growth and GCE Margin, over time, to deliver
positive RCE improvements. Another case is a switch to more R&D
investment, which takes time to generate sales and would reduce
short- or medium-term Reinvestment Effectiveness. In the long term,
this will still pay off if the R&D is successful and RCE increases.
As with anything new, it can take time to see the trends and interactions
among the five tools. Yet the only way to get there is to use
them. Discussions during operating performance reviews and plan
evaluations should actively use the five tools as part of the dialogue
until it becomes natural. Once the team gets there, the clarity used
when discussing performance and projections will greatly enhance
understanding of what is happening and what needs to be done.
It is important to track the reinvestment rate and Reinvestment
Effectiveness, since improving RCE is more valuable when
it can be done while investing effectively in the future, rather
than at the expense of it. A general theme of this book is that
many managers are inclined toward short-term thinking, profit
and cash flow “squeezing,” and underinvestment. By including
the reinvestment rate and Reinvestment Effectiveness on an equal
footing with revenue growth, gross cash margin, and asset intensity,
managers can be encouraged to balance both the short and
the long term.
Alternative for When Revenue Is Less Meaningful
In some companies, revenue fluctuates with commodity prices that
are simply passed through to the customer by contract. For example,
many chemical companies are exposed to volatile input costs related
to energy prices and various feedstocks. So, even as revenue rises and
falls with these changing costs, this volatility typically won’t flow
through to EBITDA or RCE.
Such companies have learned over the years to look at returns on
capital rather than margins, since the latter may be irrelevant because
of the pass-through structure. For these companies, the standard Five
Tools of Value Creation lose some of their explanatory power as they
are influenced by the revenue fluctuation.
Figure 17 shows one way of adapting the drivers to such a situation.
The changes in RCE are driven by the same reinvestment rate that is
used in this case to drive the growth in Gross Operating Assets. This
is combined with the RCE Return, which is simply RCE divided by
Gross Operating Assets, to determine the current and future growth
in RCE. The RCE Return can also be portrayed as the spread between
Gross Business Return and the Required Return.
It’s also worth noting that this pass-through approach is more akin
to the HOLT framework, as discussed in chapter 3, which drives cash
flow forecasts from Cash Flow Return on Investment and inflationadjusted
gross asset growth.
Of course, we could define the RCE drivers per store for a retailer,
per aircraft or passenger mile for an airline, per barrel of oil equivalent
(production or reserves) for an oil and gas company, or even per
employee for a professional services firm. It works well as long as the
drivers are few enough in number to be understandable and mutually
exclusive enough to each reflect discrete aspects of performance. By
customizing the Five Tools of Value Creation for the specific business
model, the framework becomes more useful.
Gross Operating
Asset Growth
RCE Return
ΔRCE
Required Return
Gross Business
Return
Reinvestment
Rate
Gross Operating
Assets
Gross Cash
Earnings
/
-
X
Figure 17—RCE Drivers for Revenue Pass-through Businesses
Moving Further Down the Measurement Hierarchy
The focus should, of course, be on improvements in RCE, with the
five tools providing the next layer of performance insights. All companies
have secondary performance drivers that feed into these tools
and calculations, so understanding and linking these inputs to the
five tools can sometimes be useful. This is, naturally, very different
than large scorecards with hundreds of loosely related metrics…. The
following are examples of a few key lower-level metrics:
Based on the job a person has, they may need to measure days
of sales outstanding (DSO), inventory turns, production yields, or
similarly important localized measures. If you are responsible for
customer collections, DSO is a fairly important indicator of how well
you are performing. To determine DSO, simply divide the accounts
receivable balance by total annual revenue, and multiply by 365. Of
course, the DSO may be rising in a way that is not the collection
department’s fault (sure it’s not). No, really. Maybe, during the last
round of negotiation, the customer requested to pay in 120 days, and
your sales team responded by negotiating such a meaningful price
increase that it more than covered the increase in capital charge that
was expected to result from the extended payments. Although companies
routinely measure DSO, when evaluating the performance of
customer collections, what you really want to measure is the actual
DSO versus the expected or contracted DSO. Then you hope that
your negotiation team managed to achieve prices that reflect any
financing your company is providing to the customer through the
extended payment terms.
Extended credit terms are essentially a loan and should be evaluated
as a financier would evaluate a borrower. If the customer seems
“too willing” to accept a substantial price increase in return for the
extended payment terms, perhaps they are unable to secure financing
elsewhere, and you should be on your guard and alert to this possibility.
Similarly, procurement and inventory management folks may
benefit from tracking inventory turnover, which is simply the annual
cost of goods sold divided by the inventory. It reflects the number
of times per year, on average, you turn over inventory. It may seem
that it’s always good to have less inventory, or higher inventory turns,
since this will make the capital charge lower in RCE. Yet the optimal
inventory level is not necessarily the lowest. The value-maximizing
level should be thought of as the one where any further reductions
would cause a manufacturing slowdown that results in either a cost
increase or a decline in sales volume attributable to stock-outs. Either
of these problems could cost you more in Gross Cash Earnings than
you gained by reducing inventory and the capital charge. The larger
your profit margin, the more inventory you should hold, since any
lost sales will cost you in RCE.
Manufacturing yield can also be a useful measure for those trying
to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the production process.
But, again, a higher yield is not always better, especially if it takes
considerable investment and cost to achieve a small improvement.
Scores of such measures are available—maybe some 400 of them—
that can each provide an important signal to particular operations
departments and corporate functions. But as shown in the examples
in this chapter, each must be used with care. To consistently make
the best decision, it’s important to understand and take into account
how all of RCE’s key inputs feed into the final RCE output.
Notes
1 Gregory V. Milano, “Are You Reinvesting Enough?,” CFO.com, March 4, 2011,
accessed January 15, 2019, http://ww2.cfo.com/accounting-tax/2011/03/areyou-
reinvesting-enough-2/.