allocating capital expenditures, R&D, marketing,
and other organic investments to where current and future expected
returns are projected to be highest. Despite the simplicity of this
resource allocation maxim, many management teams deviate rather
significantly from the ideal allocation of their resources.
The first problem is that suboptimal resource allocations often
occur for “strategic” reasons, which can, at least in some cases, turn
out to be very successful. Sometimes visionary strategists do, in fact,
deploy resources on a hunch about some new opportunity that has no
clear way to deliver returns—yet the project ends up being successful.
(And, of course, such successes receive extraordinary attention from
the business media.) Some of the biggest game-changers in history
have started this way, but most vision-inspired projects and initiatives
end up being a waste of resources that could have created more value
elsewhere. By contrast, the appeal of being a successful visionary
strategist is hard to resist. Most CEOs are impressed by how Steve
Jobs, Bill Gates, or Jeff Bezos were able to invent products and services
that didn’t previously exist, transform or create entire industries, and
dramatically affect our day-to-day lives; and many would love to be
seen by the world as visionary strategists like them. The problem,
however, is that most people don’t realize how rare such visionary
skills are, and how stacked the odds are against success.
Let me be clear: Strategic vision can be a profound source of
value for many businesses. But for vision to create value it must
always be grounded in both observable (and accurate) measures and
well-conceived forecasts. This usually requires pressure testing the
idea by thoughtfully considering the scale of the potential advantage
it would create, and then carefully anticipating customers’ and
competitors’ reactions. Said differently, anyone can have a vision, but
few come up with ideas that are sufficiently grounded in economic
reality to succeed.
In any case, most CEOs of large companies didn’t get where they
are by being visionaries. They usually were successful at executing
plans and delivering results, and their exceptional results impressed
their predecessor or their board nominations committee. Or maybe
their success was achieved by executing at a different company, and
they were brought in through an executive search process because
of their track record of delivering results. This record for delivering
results probably started well before they were named CEO. Whatever
department they started in, they were evidently better than their peers
at getting things done and getting them done right, so they leapfrogged
others along the way. Sure, they would never have been appointed
CEO if they didn’t seem to have both leadership and managerial skills,
but in addition they brought home the bacon. Managing your way
to the top also requires skills in navigating what are sometimes fairly
complex bureaucracies. And without a doubt, many true visionaries,
frustrated by their attempts to deal with a bureaucracy, set out on
their own entrepreneurial ventures well before they get close to the
CEO seat.
But for many of those who brave the bureaucracy and become
CEOs, the power of the office somehow goes to their head once they
get to that CEO suite. Their pay jumps immensely, their office gets
bigger, their responsibilities expand, and they are finally in a position
to reply, if they choose, “because I say so.” Top of the world, or at
least the hill. No longer are they content with selling more products
or services, improving quality and the customer experience so they
can charge premium prices, or driving cost efficiencies and capital
productivity. They “have people” to take care of these mundane tasks,
just as they took care of them for their predecessor. Now that they
are CEO, they suddenly have a vision for how they will transform the
industry with a revolutionary product, a pioneering business model,
or a reimagined…something or other. And the more revolutionary
the product, the more likely it is to require investing significant sums
for an extended period without profits. It’s all based on having blind
faith in their vision without any compelling empirical underpinning.
Please don’t misunderstand—pursuing visionary goals is wonderful
when it works. Despite the tone of the prior paragraphs, there
is in fact considerable value potential in developing visionary ideas,
experimentation, creativity, and, yes, reimagination. But there is no
reason why this must be the only plan. In the areas where we have
proven expertise, we can focus attention on maximizing value by
investing and managing effectively, while at the same time pursuing
blue-sky creative ideas—though these may need to be separated
organizationally for both to be effective.
The second major problem with “strategic” resource allocation
is the general tendency of top management or corporate headquarters
to allocate capital among business units uneconomically. As we’ve
previously discussed, this often results from a misguided attempt to
be equitable to all their projects or departments, or because of their
limited understanding of where their business really creates value—or
often both.
The SRA Process
Getting the most out of the current businesses requires an effective
SRA process. If the company has several businesses, the first step
is to determine the RCE of each, based on historical and projected
financial information, to see which businesses are most successful at
converting precious funding into value. The SRA process must then
dig deep to identify businesses with different products, services, geographies,
distribution channels, and other dimensions that warrant more
growth investment. The main aim in so doing is to distinguish such
opportunities from the products and services that need to improve
RCE margin and thereby earn the right to grow. We want to throw
good money after good, not bad.
As we touched on in chapter 7, the potential for long-term value
creation is usually highly concentrated. It sounds like a consulting
cliché, and it is, but the 80/20 rule—that roughly 80% of value creation
comes from 20% of business activities—applies to most companies.
This 20% is where we want to concentrate new resources. Beyond this
all-important 20%, there are usually some modest value creators, some
value-neutral activities, and a decent-sized group of value destroyers.
Often the process of understanding where value is created gets
bogged down in the assignment of cost and capital, and it is true
that there is no perfect answer on this topic. Sometimes companies
readjust the numbers over and over, while managers with different
personal interests and biases seek the answer that helps their cause.
It’s the ultimate analysis paralysis.
-20%
-10%
0%
10%
20%
30%
A B C D E E F G H I
RCE Return
Allocation Method #1 Allocation Method #2
Perspectives on the very
best businesses are not
usually affected by
allocation methodology.
Perspectives on the very
worst businesses are not
usually affected by
allocation methodology.
Figure 38—Perspectives on the Best and Worst Don’t Change
But, as illustrated in figure 38, the reassignment of costs has
little impact on one’s perspectives of the best and worst businesses,
and these are the ones where real value creation and destruction is
happening. Once a leader has a good feel for which businesses are
the strongest and weakest value creators, it’s best to get about the
business of investing to grow the high-RCE businesses and either
fixing or disposing of the ones that are destroying value. The ones
in the middle, with RCE that is slightly positive or slightly negative,
depending on how costs are assigned, can be dealt with later; their
strategic actions should be considered a lower priority.2
Knowing that one product line creates, say, five or even 10 times as
much value per dollar of sales as another line invites an opportunity to
redeploy resources to boost performance. However, to do this, management
must know exactly where value is being created and destroyed.
They must estimate RCE for product and service lines, brands, geographies,
distribution channels, and customer groups to see which create
significant value. Only through this process can they become confident
about where they should disproportionately invest in growth.
By forecasting RCE, management can determine expected longterm
value creation, which may differ significantly from current
performance. Corporate finance theory and textbooks emphasize that
valuation is—and should be—driven by the activities and performance
of the future. But though this is right, it’s important to start by examining
the current level of RCE and, in cases of low or negative current
RCE, to accept business-unit projections of significant increases only
when such projections come with meaningful and credible proposals
for improving strategy or operations. Huge sums have been wasted on
businesses struggling to create meaningful value that were believed to
be on a turnaround path. It’s true that turnarounds can be extremely
successful, but this typically comes from being effective at slashing
costs, improving capital productivity, and stabilizing an otherwise
poor-performing business. This can boost a negative RCE to zero
(at which point, value ceases to be destroyed), though a turnaround
rarely leads to meaningfully positive RCE. The exception, of course,
is when the investments materially boost differentiation of products
and services, as discussed below.
It’s also important for executives at public companies to know
that the frequency of turnaround success is far greater in private
equity-owned companies than in publicly owned companies. One
reason for this is that private companies often find it easier to take
important, but unpleasant, actions without much publicity. They also
almost always have stronger incentives that are more directly tied to
value creation for the owners.
It is critical to understand why value creation and destruction
occur. The basic determinants of high, sustainable RCE—or recurring
negative RCE—can be traced to the good or the bad economics
of the market and strategic position. Market economics refers to
the growth and return of the market as a whole—is it economically
attractive? When a segment of an industry is rapidly growing, and
everyone is earning decent returns on capital, the more successful
competitors have plenty of opportunities to drive their own growth
to attractive levels by winning a greater share of the growth. This is
often more feasible than growing above-market in a less attractive and
slow-growing industry, where your extra revenue requires someone
else to have declining revenue. Competitors don’t like growing slower
than the market, but this pales in comparison to their distaste for
declines in revenue. Growing share in a fast-growing market is like
being chased by wild animals in an open field, where there is plenty of
room to maneuver. Growing share in a flat market is more like being
chased by the same animals through a narrow, dead-end alleyway.
The unfortunate outcome of growing above-market in a slowgrowth
or flat-market segment is often a meaningful decline in profitability.
As pricing, promotion, and other costs are used to juice
the growth higher, usually the decrease in margin more than offsets
the value of this growth. In the extreme, a price war ensues—and
everybody loses. Exceptions to this can be found, but usually these
only occur when the starting market share is so small that it doesn’t
ruffle any feathers, or when the product is so well positioned that it
can achieve market share increases without excessive margin erosion.
Strategic position in a market refers to whether a business has
a competitive advantage in product differentiation or costs. Perhaps
the product has features not available from others, allowing an abovemarket
price or market share gains. Or maybe the product is perceived
to be of higher quality, or it sports a brand that consumers prefer to
be associated with. Both real and perceived product differentiators
can justify an advantaged strategic position, as can a low-cost process.
The cost angle, however, will last only if the advantage can’t readily be
replicated. Product and service differentiation tends to be more sustainable
than a cost advantage, though there are examples of companies
that have sustained a cost advantage, too, such as DuPont’s superior
production processes for titanium dioxide—though even DuPont’s
advantage has been threatened by offshore theft of its important trade
secrets and other intellectual property.3
Businesses that are advantaged in attractive markets will show high
and growing RCE, while disadvantaged businesses in unattractive markets
will have negative or declining RCE. Going back to our turnaround discussion,
the practical limit on RCE in a turnaround often derives from a lack
of differentiation. The combination of market economics and competitive
position will determine how fast a business can grow and how much value
the growth will create. In figure 39, some of the sources of competitive
advantage that collectively drive RCE are identified.
Sources of
Competitive
Advantage
Brand Strength
Innovation
Process Know-How
Sharper Decisions
Captive Supply
Execution Mentality
Ownership Culture
Price
RCE
Competitive
Advantages
Commoditization
and Competitive
Pressure
Cost Including
Capital Charges
Perceived
Value to
Customer
Figure 39—Competitive Advantages Drive RCE
The starting point is the perceived value to the customer. If this
value is not meaningfully higher than the total cost, including capital
charges, there is no hope for generating strong RCE. But simply having
a product that is valuable is likely to be effective at delivering RCE
only when the product has meaningful differentiation that allows the
company to set prices at a level that will deliver growth and positive
RCE. And this requires being able to stick with a premium pricing
strategy, even when competitors compete on price, which in turn
requires having meaningful competitive advantages, or differentiation.
Everyone waxes eloquent about their “competitive advantages”
in investor presentations, but is your business or product truly differentiated?
If so, you probably already have positive and growing RCE,
because when a product is truly differentiated, management has the
choice of whether either to charge a premium price or to grow faster
than the market segment and thus gain market share, or some combination
of the two. If your product does not sell at a premium price
and is not gaining market share, then it’s not differentiated. True
differentiation creates value for the customer that can be monetized
by the seller either via a premium price (higher RCE Margin) or by
gaining share (faster growth). Be dispassionate in evaluating competitive
advantages and considering investments in innovation, so you can
increase the strength of your competitive advantages.
At Fortuna Advisors, we developed a strategic evaluation chart,
as shown for the healthcare sector in figure 40, which can be helpful
in understanding market attractiveness and strategic position. This
chart is based on RCE Margin, which is a useful metric when we
want to understand the value of revenue growth. But we can also
recast this information into the form of an RCE Return when we
want to understand the value of each element of investment. For a
complete picture, we would also create a similar chart on revenue
or investment growth, and the two together would provide answers
about the attractiveness of our industry and whether our strategic
position is advantaged or disadvantaged.
A
Pharmaceuticals
B
Healthcare Equipment and
Supplies
Healthcare Providers and
Services
Biotechnology
Life Sciences Tools and Services
Median RCE Margin of Industry Company RCE Margin
Market Attractiveness
Strategic Position
Healthcare Sector Constituents by Industry
Figure 40—Illustrative Strategic Evaluation Chart for Healthcare
Each company or business is represented by a dot, though for
visual clarity the figure only shows every third company horizontally.
The horizontal dimension (x-axis) indicates the RCE margin for the
company, and the vertical dimension (y-axis) indicates the median
RCE margin of their industry within the sector. The pharmaceutical
industry is at the top of the graph (i.e., it has the highest y-value),
which means it’s the most attractive in terms of RCE margin. Although
healthcare providers and services make up the least attractive industry,
it is still decently positive, and each individual company is positive, as
well. Healthcare is a great sector for value creation.
The diagonal dotted line connects the origin and the medians of
each industry. Companies to the right of this dotted line are advantaged
relative to their industry because they are above the median.
Those to the left of it are disadvantaged. Pharmaceutical company
A is disadvantaged in the most attractive industry, while healthcare
equipment and supplies company B is advantaged, though operating
in an industry of only medium attractiveness. While both companies
have about the same RCE Margin, the strategic import of this figure
is that there is more upside for improving performance in company
A because it operates in an industry with far greater proven upside
potential, relative to current performance. If businesses A and B were
divisions of the same company, this chart would be helpful in deciding
how best to allocate resources.
Of course, there is much more information to be considered, and
decisions can be complex. Business A might have been advantaged a
few years ago and has perhaps slipped because a few drugs have gone
off-patent while the pipeline of new pharmaceutical products wasn’t
adequate to replace them. Business B might have been disadvantaged,
but maybe has since dramatically improved its strategic position
through product innovation. The point is not that the Strategic
Evaluation Charts make decisions easy, but rather that they provide
useful information for judging performance, interpreting plans, and
allocating resources.
Sometimes it’s helpful to evaluate current and future RCE by
customer or customer type, as we once were asked to do by a global
oilfield service company with high asset-intensity and substantial
fixed costs. Management historically had dreaded losing a project
bid, for fixed-cost absorption reasons. Any unutilized capacity would
effectively increase the cost of all the other capacity, since those fixed
costs would be spread (and would drag down returns) across the rest
of the organization. The finance and commercial teams did very
sophisticated financial analysis at the time of each bid, but only highlevel
sales and gross profits were tracked after the fact.
We developed a line-of-sight into the RCE of each client project.
In each geographic region, we allocated revenue, costs, and assets
to determine customer RCE. Rolling this up globally by customer
showed that many large global customers delivered negligible RCE,
at best. Previously, many bids were justified based on retaining the
business of these large global customers, yet there wasn’t much value
created. With some large customers, it was so bad that the global
RCE contribution of the customer was quite negative. If we concede
price on project A to protect projects B and C—and then use the same
logic to make price concessions on B and C, too—then we end up
destroying value.
The client created a small marketing group with the responsibility
of overseeing global customers to ensure that their needs were
properly serviced and that the regional management would accept
marginal RCE projects only if meaningful positive RCE projects were
found elsewhere with the same customer. One tough-negotiating
customer generated such poor RCE that our client offered a contract
renewal ultimatum: Either the customer had to pay more, or our client
would reallocate resources. Their customer thought our client was
bluffing, and the negotiations collapsed. Within months, the resources
were working for a more profitable customer, and RCE improved.
By understanding where they were creating value and where they
were not, our client was able to materially increase the RCE run rate.
Sure, for a few months RCE declined, so this also required a slightly
longer-term view.
Such hard-nosed decisions are often easier for a business owner
to make than for an executive who is an employee. In the short run,
losing a meaningful customer can reduce RCE, as capacity utilization
drops and fixed costs are concentrated against fewer activities.
This makes it hard to achieve or exceed budgeted performance in the
current year, which personally costs the executives, since they experience
a decline in their annual incentive plan payouts. It might be great
if in a few months a new, more-desirable customer is contracted, but
during the current year, the new contract may not make up for the
revenue loss during the uncontracted period. And the benefits of the
new customer will just get folded into the budget for the following
year, so there will be no benefit to annual incentive payments next
year, either. This is only one of the many ways that current management
practices reinforce short-term thinking, which will be expanded
on in chapter 14.
For another client, we helped prepare a three-dimensional segmentation
analysis by customer group, product family, and distribution
channel, simultaneously, to better understand the results. The business
was quite complicated and intertwined, but the client had already
done a tremendous amount of good work on activity-based costing,
also known as ABC. The problem was that they were long on analysis
and short on useful interpretation and action. As often happens,
every meeting to discuss the segmentation ended with skepticism and
demands for “running the numbers again.” We were brought in to
help develop the logic for applying the ABC methodology to allocate
capital, to help the company interpret the findings, and to identify
and simulate potential changes in both pricing and the allocation of
capital and marketing resources.
The idea of a three-dimensional segmentation is common, because
a product may earn substantial RCE with a particular customer group
that sees differentiation and values it, while a different customer group
may be less sensitive to such differentiation and buy mainly on price.
In some channels, such as modern online marketing, resources can
be targeted to entice the valued customers without wasting resources
on futile attempts to attract those that are unresponsive. Figure 41
shows how a three-dimensional allocation works. In this case, three
product families exist across three customer groups, with each served
by three distribution channels.
All revenues, costs, and assets must be fully allocated to the 27
(3 Î 3 Î 3) cubes Of course, there can be four or five dimensions,
in which cases the allocations work the same, though it is harder to
visualize. Or we could have, as an extreme example, seven product
families across six customer groups served by 11 channels, so the
number of cubes can change. Some cubes may also be empty, since
some customer groups may not buy certain product families nor use
some distribution channels.
Product Family
Customer Group
Distribution Channel
Figure 41—Segmenting RCE in Three Dimensions
When we finished creating and interpreting the three-dimensional
allocation analysis, the answers were unambiguous. Certain combinations
of product, customer, and channel were outstanding, with high
RCE margin and, in some cases, RCE that was greater than 100%
of invested assets. Back the truck up and invest as much as you can!
Other segments needed to earn the right to grow, because they had
meaningfully negative RCE even though they were allocated much
lower costs and capital per unit of volume growth, based on their
lighter-touch business model. The biggest problem, we found, was
that the segments that should have been growing were shrinking,
and those that should have been focused on improvements in pricing,
efficiency, and productivity were rapidly growing—not good.
The problem appeared to be pricing. A high percentage of their
cost structure was fixed, and the same was true of their asset base.
During the 2008–2009 downturn, volumes declined and financial
performance dropped significantly in the face of expanding unutilized
capacity. For certain large customers, the client turned to estimates of
marginal costs when setting prices, figuring, correctly, that as long as
their prices surpassed these marginal costs, the incremental volume
would pad its bottom line. But as capacity utilization rose, the company
maintained the low-pricing policies, in some cases because of committed
long-term contracts—but in others due to simple managerial
inertia. The growth felt good!
Once the unutilized capacity dried up, the client began to invest
considerable fresh capital on new capacity to handle the volume
growth, and at that time its pricing models should have transitioned
to more of a full-cost basis. But more important, even while the
unutilized capacity was available, performance measurement should
always have been done on a fully allocated cost basis. If our marginal
cost estimates are accurate, and if we are paid prices above that
level, then the new volume should increase the fully allocated results
versus what would be the case without the volume. Maintaining
performance measurement on fully allocated costs is an imperative,
because estimating marginal costs is exceedingly tricky, especially
when all sorts of shared costs and assets must be dealt with. As
it turns out, many costs and assets are more variable than people
want to think.
The CEO of another client once said to me, “Obviously, I don’t
cost any more if we sell a bit more product, so I am a fixed cost. And
so is everyone else in this room. We really only want to include variable
costs.” I politely asked whether, if the business were to double in
size, the HR department and compensation consultants would show
the board that the appropriate compensation package for him and
his colleagues would be higher, since they would then be managing a
bigger company. He only smiled. In the long run, everything is variable,
so we only ever want to use a variable-cost approach for short, tactical
pricing moves to fill up an unexpected low-capacity utilization. And
when we choose to do this, we have to be extremely careful, since
we can inadvertently be training customers to expect lower pricing.
Unless we have significant differentiation, we may never be able to
raise prices back up again without meaningful market share losses.
Once we know the performance of different business areas, we
need to scrutinize how well this aligns with resource allocation. The
basic rule is, the better the RCE improvement opportunity, the more
we should seek to invest in growth. Comparing resource allocations
among businesses, products, and customer groups is best done using
the concept of a “reinvestment rate,” which we defined in chapter 4
as a percentage of Gross Cash Earnings.4
The resource reinvestment rate approach automatically biases
management toward investing more in the more profitable businesses,
as shown in figure 42. It’s true, management may have
increased the investment as a percentage of sales in the more
profitable business, but maybe not to the level implied by the reinvestment
rate. By limiting investment in the most profitable businesses,
management may have been trying to avoid the appearance
of playing favorites. But use of the reinvestment rate focuses the
view of “fair and square” on cash profitability instead of revenue;
and if business C wants a higher allocation, then it has to improve
its profitability.
Sales GCE RCE Investment
% of
Sales
Reinvestment
Rate Investment
% of
Sales
Reinvestment
Rate
X 1,000 400 200 100 10% 25% 160 16% 40%
Y 1,000 250 125 100 10% 40% 100 10% 40%
Z 1,000 100 50 100 10% 100% 40 4% 40%
Investment Allocated as a
Constant Percentage of Sales
Investment Allocated as a
Constant Reinvestment Rate
Figure 42—Benefits of Using a Reinvestment Rate
Of course, it’s not only about moving resource numbers around.
We need viable investment strategies and projects, which requires
an effective process for creatively developing and rigorously evaluating
resource allocation options. Don’t simply consider incremental
improvements on the status quo. Once good line-of-sight is available,
we must search far and wide for ideas that may help us invest more
resources and create value. For high-RCE businesses, look for all
possible ways to accelerate growth without significantly damaging
returns. For chronically negative RCE businesses, come up with options
to drive RCE higher, often by shrinking or harvesting and by focusing
on the parts of the business that are profitable. This is an exercise in
creative thinking grounded in market economics, competitive position,
and RCE. Frequently, the best ideas come from customer dialogues,
so take every opportunity to learn from them.
It’s also important to assess the incremental RCE for each viable
option after contemplating how customers and competitors will
respond. Compare the options, based on ease of implementation as
well as the likelihood of success and scale, which is the amount of
expected RCE and value. The best options can then be selected and
converted into a strategic plan. This comprehensive evaluation, project
selection, and planning process requires open-minded creativity,
candor, transparency, thoroughness, and discipline, along with pace
and decisiveness, to drive action and results.
A Case Example
Consider a hypothetical company, based on a former client of mine,
holding a portfolio of products that is quite profitable but unable to
grow much faster than GDP. The biggest resource commitment it
makes each year is capital spending, which averages about 10% of
sales. Traditionally, capital has been allocated proportional to sales,
with slight variations across the product portfolio, mostly based on
differences in EBITDA margin and, occasionally, on other strategic
factors as well. Management feels they are doing well, since so many
companies only use gross margin or contribution margin to evaluate
product profitability; and they have taken the extra step of allocating
G&A and other costs to get to an EBITDA estimate by product.
In figure 43, we see the four products, the size of each addressable
market and market share, as well as the estimated EBITDA and
EBITDA margins. The figure also shows the existing plan for capital
expenditures and the percentage of sales for each business. Management
is clearly biasing their investment toward product A, which is
the largest product and has the highest EBITDA margin. Product C
also has a high EBITDA margin and receives the next-highest allocation
as a percentage of sales. But as we will see, since this is a less
asset-intensive business, management has effectively reduced the
allocation as a percentage of sales. More-asset-intensive businesses
tend to require more maintenance capital, and it tends to take more
capital for them to grow capacity, volume, and revenue. Products B
and D both receive allocations that are a lower percentages of sales;
and, again, the difference between the allocations to B and D are due
to differences in asset intensity and maintenance capital requirements.
Product A B C D
Market Size 10,000 4,400 18,000 5,000
Market Share 30.0% 50.0% 8.3% 14.0%
Sales 3,000 2,200 1,500 700
EBITDA 1,050 330 450 140
EBITDA Margin 35.0% 15.0% 30.0% 20.0%
CapEx (Existing Plan) 425 145 135 35
% of Sales 14.2% 6.6% 9.0% 5.0%
Figure 43—Case: Product Portfolio Characteristics
One other consideration is market share and its implications
for the potential runway for future growth. Products C and D have
meaningfully lower market shares, and therefore may have more
opportunity to grow at above-market rates by increasing market
share. This doesn’t seem to have been considered by management.
Next we will fill in some additional information on taxes, assets,
and RCE, as shown in Figure 44.
Product A B C D
Tax (100) (30) (45) (15)
Gross Cash Earnings 950 300 405 125
GCE Margin 31.7% 13.6% 27.0% 17.9%
Gross Operating Assets 6,000 3,300 1,200 350
Asset Intensity 2.00x 1.50x 0.80x 0.50x
Capital Charge (@10%) (600) (330) (120) (35)
Residual Cash Earnings 350 (30) 285 90
RCE Margin 11.7% -1.4% 19.0% 12.9%
RCE Return 5.8% -0.9% 23.8% 25.7%
Figure 44—Case: Product RCE Calculations
Once we know the estimated taxes, which are determined after
considering the depreciation each product is allocated based on producNINE:
STRATEGIC RESOURCE ALLOCATION 195
tion and other property, plant, and equipment, we can calculate Gross
Cash Earnings, or GCE. We also estimate Gross Operating Assets, or
GOA, including both net operating working capital and gross property,
plant & equipment, so we can then calculate Residual Cash Earnings.
The tax rates don’t vary much for this company, so the GCE margins
are directionally similar to the EBITDA margins above. But once
we bring the assets into the picture, the story completely changes.
Products A and B are vertically integrated, with all parts manufactured
and assembled in their Western European and Canadian plants. This
production strategy, when compared to outsourcing, maintains control
and keeps operating costs down; but it is very asset-intensive, which
means higher capital costs.
Once detailed line-of-sight information is available, the first
important observation is that products C and D are both delivering
RCE that is over 20% of their Gross Operating Assets, which we call
RCE Return—and remember that RCE already reflects the charge
for capital, so these performances are absolutely outstanding. This is
particularly noteworthy for product D, whose low EBITDA margin
is more than made up for by its efficient use of assets. Several years
earlier, when their aging production facility was causing production
delays and quality problems, they were faced with a decision to either
build a new replacement production facility or find suppliers to do
their production for them. Due to their lack of scale, they found the
overall economics to be better by outsourcing. It may be that once they
have scale, performance would be better with in-house production.
These two businesses also have the lowest market share. So now
that we know that they have both the most value-adding growth (high
RCE margin) and the biggest potential for more growth, we can see
that C and D should be the strategic priorities. Finding creative ways
to invest in and grow these products will have the largest impact on
the success of the overall company.
Many financial managers reading this will be surprised that the
emphasis is first and foremost on products C and D. Their eyes are
finely tuned from years of hard work examining financial reports,
and they are unconsciously drawn to any negative numbers in a table.
They may even have been frustrated while reading the previous three
paragraphs, waiting for an emphasis to be placed on the negative
RCE being delivered by product B. “DON’T THEY SEE THAT IT’S
NEGATIVE!” Yes, of course it’s negative, and addressing that is important.
But as discussed in chapter 7, more value is usually created by
nurturing and driving success in the best businesses than by fixing the
worst businesses. We therefore want to reduce the rate of investment
in product B and encourage the product management team to find
ways to improve price, reduce cost, and become more productive in
utilizing assets, so they can earn the right to grow. But fight the urge
to spend so much time trying to fix problem businesses that you pay
too little attention to the successful ones.
In the upper portion of figure 45, we see the existing CapEx allocation
again, with some additional statistics, including the reinvestment
rate, which shows the percentages of Gross Cash Earnings that are
reinvested back into the business as capital expenditures.
Product A B C D
CapEx (Existing Plan) 425 145 135 35
% of Sales 14.2% 6.6% 9.0% 5.0%
% of Assets 7.1% 4.4% 11.3% 10.0%
Reinvestment Rate 44.7% 48.3% 33.3% 28.0%
CapEx (Reallocation Plan) 300 75 275 90
% of Sales 10.0% 3.4% 18.3% 12.9%
% of Assets 5.0% 2.3% 22.9% 25.7%
Reinvestment Rate 31.6% 25.0% 67.9% 72.0%
Figure 45—Case: Product CapEx Reallocation
The existing plan has a higher reinvestment rate in the two moreasset-
intensive businesses, which is exactly the opposite of the priority
we determined when we examined RCE return, above. The lower
portion of the figure shows an illustrative reallocation of the same
total capital expenditure budget with the priority on products C and
D, so they have the resources they need to grow. How do we go about
deciding on such reallocations of resources?
To improve value creation and the likely TSR going forward,
various strategic resource allocation options should be considered. Of
course, the first priority is to shift the capital expenditure allocations
to increase the reinvestment rate in the business delivering more RCE
improvement per unit of investment. To make this work often involves
both investing significantly more in innovation to extend and grow
the higher RCE products and developing paths for growth through
capital expenditure. These products are highly valuable, so if we can
create new product extensions and applications, we may be able to
amplify the total amount of potential value-creating investment and
hence the amount of RCE we can generate.
Finally, we need to reduce the cost and capital intensity of the big
products, especially B, to drive RCE higher so that they earn the right
to grow. Consider all possible cost cutting, process streamlining, and
improvements in asset productivity via improved inventory management
and capacity utilization. Also, given the success of product C,
which has outsourced all production and assembly, it would be worth
considering partial or complete outsourcing for products A and B, as
well. Perhaps production is not our core competency. Maybe we can
sell the production facilities to someone with strong manufacturing
expertise and buy finished products under contract. In some cases, we
can improve quality and reduce cost at the same time. Keep in mind
throughout this process, though, that the goal is to create value, not
to minimize costs. So be active in eliminating unnecessary costs and
assets, but avoid a slash-and-burn mindset that can sometimes lead
to cutting as much muscle as fat.
Though it may start as a one-time special project, strategic resource
allocation needs to become an ongoing way of life if the benefits are
going to be significant. At a minimum, it should be repeated before
every important strategic discussion at the front end of the annual
planning process. And for companies that truly embrace the ownership
culture, it should become a central feature in every strategic and
tactical resource allocation decision, in performance evaluation, and
in post-investment reviews.
Investors Care About Strategic Resource Allocation
Where and how a management team allocates its capital, R&D, and
marketing resources tells investors a lot about its priorities. Investors
and analysts ask questions at investor presentations and on earnings
calls, and, even though details may not be published, the answers that
management provides help build a picture of where they earn decent
returns and how well their resource allocation is aligned.
For companies that report segment information, investors can
patch together a quick and revealing image of how well management
invests its resources. Consider IBM, with primary operating segments
reported as Cognitive Solutions, Global Business Services, Technology
Services & Cloud Platforms, and Systems. IBM also reports a financing
segment, and there are line items for eliminations and unallocated
other items.
If we focus on the four primary operating segments, it is fairly
simple to estimate returns and reinvestment rates. The company
reports segment revenue, operating profit, and depreciation and amortization,
which collectively get us to an approximate EBITDA and
EBITDA margin. It does not provide tax information, so we can do
our segment analysis on a pretax basis to get a general idea of where
it earns better returns. It is quite possible that the company’s performance
and earnings power would be reflected more accurately if R&D
were treated as an investment (instead of an expense), since it invests
more than $5 billion a year in R&D. But since it’s not disclosed in the
segment data, we will ignore it. Actual investors can ask questions
during earnings calls and conference presentations to get a sense of
such things, and a careful review of investor communication transcripts
may reveal answers.
We can determine a simple estimate of EBITDA and of EBITDA
margin by segment, as shown in figure 46.
The stock market has not been kind to IBM over the period, and it
is easy to see why. Every segment has had declining revenue, declining
net profit before tax, and declining estimated EBITDA. Three of the
four segments have had declining estimated EBITDA margin, too,
and the one with an increase in estimated EBITDA margin suffered
the largest percentage decline in revenue.
Next we turn to the assets, shown in figure 47, where we have
much less information. Most companies, IBM included, provide only
one total number for assets, which makes it hard to really know what’s
included and what is operating or not. To keep it simple, we are relying
exclusively on the reported segment information. But investors
and analysts who follow the company can delve more deeply into
published information and can ask questions to try to build out a
more detailed model of IBM’s segments.
2014 2015 2016 2017 CAGR
Cognitive Solutions 21,906 20,055 20,817 21,100 -1.2%
Global Business Services 20,055 17,664 17,109 16,711 -5.9%
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 39,729 35,840 36,052 34,934 -4.2%
Systems 13,300 10,325 8 ,464 8 ,945 -12.4%
2014 2015 2016 2017 CAGR
Cognitive Solutions 8 ,215 7 ,245 6 ,352 6 ,817 -6.0%
Global Business Services 3 ,347 2 ,602 1 ,732 1 ,401 -25.2%
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 7 ,084 5 ,669 4 ,707 4 ,344 -15.0%
Systems 1 ,384 1 ,722 9 33 1 ,135 -6.4%
2014 2015 2016 2017 CAGR
Cognitive Solutions 1 ,040 9 21 1 ,228 1 ,121
Global Business Services 9 8 8 1 1 04 1 01
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 1 ,982 1 ,944 2 ,224 2 ,359
Systems 7 34 3 21 3 75 3 41
2014 2015 2016 2017 CAGR
Cognitive Solutions 9 ,255 8 ,166 7 ,580 7 ,938 -5.0%
Global Business Services 3 ,445 2 ,683 1 ,836 1 ,502 -24.2%
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 9 ,066 7 ,613 6 ,931 6 ,703 -9.6%
Systems 2 ,118 2 ,043 1 ,308 1 ,476 -11.3%
2014 2015 2016 2017 Average % Change
Cognitive Solutions 42.2% 40.7% 36.4% 37.6% 39.3% -11%
Global Business Services 17.2% 15.2% 10.7% 9.0% 13.0% -48%
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 22.8% 21.2% 19.2% 19.2% 20.6% -16%
Systems 15.9% 19.8% 15.5% 16.5% 16.9% 4%
Revenues
Net Profit Before Tax
Depreciation & Amortization
Estimated EBITDA (Net Profit Before Tax Plus Depreciation & Amortization)
Estimated EBITDA Margin
Note: CAGR is compound annual growth rate
Figure 46—Estimated EBITDA Margin for IBM Segments
With the assets given, we can calculate a simple cash return by
dividing the estimated EBITDA by the reported segment assets.
This information is admittedly incomplete, since it depends on
the modest disclosures required by accounting rules. So, we tend
only to compare returns, rather than to make absolute judgments
about what is good or bad. It’s beyond the scope of this book, but in
the more elaborate segment models my colleagues and I have built
to understand the segments of client competitors, we allocate every
element of the consolidated company’s GCE and GOA to the segments,
using logical allocations like accounts receivable as a percentage of
revenue and accumulated depreciation as a percent of assets. This
would give us a picture that is likely to be more accurate, but the
quick estimated approach depicted here provides directionally correct
insights in most cases.
2014 2015 2016 2017 CAGR
Cognitive Solutions 9 ,255 8 ,166 7 ,580 7 ,938 -5.0%
Global Business Services 3 ,445 2 ,683 1 ,836 1 ,502 -24.2%
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 9 ,066 7 ,613 6 ,931 6 ,703 -9.6%
Systems 2 ,118 2 ,043 1 ,308 1 ,476 -11.3%
2014 2015 2016 2017 CAGR
Cognitive Solutions 19,525 20,017 25,517 24,829 27.2%
Global Business Services 8 ,831 8 ,327 8 ,628 8 ,713 -1.3%
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 22,512 23,530 24,085 24,619 9.4%
Systems 4 ,219 3 ,967 3 ,812 3 ,898 -7.6%
2014 2015 2016 2017 Change
Cognitive Solutions 0.89x 1.00x 1.23x 1.18x 0.29x
Global Business Services 0.44x 0.47x 0.50x 0.52x 0.08x
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 0.57x 0.66x 0.67x 0.70x 0.14x
Systems 0.32x 0.38x 0.45x 0.44x 0.12x
2014 2015 2016 2017 Average % Change
Cognitive Solutions 47.4% 40.8% 29.7% 32.0% 37.5% -32.6%
Global Business Services 39.0% 32.2% 21.3% 17.2% 27.4% -55.8%
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 40.3% 32.4% 28.8% 27.2% 32.2% -32.4%
Systems 50.2% 51.5% 34.3% 37.9% 43.5% -24.6%
Assets
Asset Intensity (ASSETS / Revenue)
Estimated EBITDA (Net Profit Before Tax Plus Depreciation & Amortization)
Quick Cash Return (Estimated EBITDA / Assets)
Note: CAGR is compound annual growth rate
Figure 47—Quick Cash Return for IBM Segments
Each segment had higher asset intensity in 2017 than in 2014.
So, since revenue and EBITDA have been sliding, each segment has
also increased assets per dollar of revenue over the three-year period.
This contributed to the decline in quick cash returns experienced by
all four segments. Although all four have fading returns, it’s clear
that Global Business Services has the lowest and sharpest-fading
quick cash returns, while Systems has the highest and least-fading
returns. It’s also notable that Systems had the largest decline in
assets, despite apparently having the highest and most sustained
quick cash returns.
Because IBM also provides Capital Expenditure information by
segment, we can estimate a reinvestment rate as CapEx divided by estimated
EBITDA, as shown in figure 48.
2014 2015 2016 2017 Average % Change
Cognitive Solutions 47.4% 40.8% 29.7% 32.0% 37.5% -32.6%
Global Business Services 39.0% 32.2% 21.3% 17.2% 27.4% -55.8%
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 40.3% 32.4% 28.8% 27.2% 32.2% -32.4%
Systems 50.2% 51.5% 34.3% 37.9% 43.5% -24.6%
2014 2015 2016 2017 CAGR % Total
Cognitive Solutions 4 13 4 48 4 95 3 73 -3.3% 12.9%
Global Business Services 7 9 8 6 5 5 5 0 -14.1% 1.7%
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 2 ,321 2 ,619 2 ,382 2 ,290 -0.4% 78.9%
Systems 6 27 3 21 4 53 1 89 -33.0% 6.5%
Note: Percentage of Total applies to 2017.
2014 2015 2016 2017 Average % Change
Cognitive Solutions 4.5% 5.5% 6.5% 4.7% 5.3% 5.3%
Global Business Services 2.3% 3.2% 3.0% 3.3% 3.0% 45.2%
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 25.6% 34.4% 34.4% 34.2% 32.1% 33.4%
Systems 29.6% 15.7% 34.6% 12.8% 23.2% -56.7%
Quick Cash Return (Estimated EBITDA / Assets)
Capital Expenditure
Quick Reinvestment Rate (Capital Expenditure / Estimated EBITDA)
Note: CAGR is compound annual growth rate
Figure 48—Quick Reinvestment Rate for IBM Segments
During this period, IBM invested heavily in R&D, so a more suitable
reinvestment rate would include both capital expenditures and
R&D. But because the published segment data doesn’t include the
R&D information, we use only capital expenditures in the example.
Our goal, after all, is to illustrate the technique.
Capital expenditures in the Systems segment, which has the highest
and most sustained quick cash returns, have declined by 33% per
year, on average, and its quick reinvestment rate has been cut by
more than half. Technology Services & Cloud Platforms, by contrast,
received 78.9% of the 2017 total segment capital expenditures and
has a quick reinvestment rate that is well above the rest—and indeed
well above the rate of reinvestment in 2014. This is undoubtedly the
area IBM is focused on growing, but it is somewhat concerning that
at least on the dimensions studied here, the company doesn’t seem to
be driving stronger or increasing returns; and its corporate revenue,
estimated EBITDA, and estimated EBITDA margins are all heading
meaningfully down. If it is increasing R&D in this segment, could
that be influencing the apparent decline in margins? This would be
a good question for investors to ask management.
Companies should do this analysis on their own segments and
make sure that the signals investors receive are accurate and as
intended. There are, of course, limitations to this type of analysis.
Since good and bad businesses can be mixed in the same segments, the
segment performance details may be quite different from our quick
estimates, based on segment reporting; and the numbers could even
be clouded if management is trying to influence the interpretation.
For example, in some cases it seems that management may be trying
to make some segments look better through allocations and transfer
pricing, of course within the constraints of what is legitimate, given
the accounting rules. Perhaps it would like a segment that normally
attracts a higher multiple to show a bit more profit. This, of course,
is spin.
Regardless of these shortcomings, it’s important to be aware that
investors can do this analysis themselves and will form judgments on
whether they believe management understands and embraces the idea
that they should be investing more where returns are higher. To avoid
any potential confusion, the message here is that companies should
have better resource allocation—not that they should improve their
presentation tactics.
Notes
1 A good portion of this chapter was derived from an article I coauthored with
Jim McTaggart that was published by FEI Daily. Gregory V. Milano and Jim
McTaggart, “Overcoming 3 Roadblocks to Strategic Resource Allocation,” FEI
Daily, accessed January 15, 2019, https://www.financialexecutives.org/FEI-Daily/
February-2018/Strategic-Resource-Allocation.aspx.
2 Joseph Theriault, “How to Allocate Less Time to Allocations,” FEI Daily, January
9, 2019, accessed June 25, 2019, http://fortuna-advisors.com/2019/01/15/
how-to-allocate-less-time-to-allocations/.
3 See Del Quentin Wilber, “How a Corporate Spy Swiped Plans for DuPont’s
Billion-Dollar Color Formula,” Bloomberg Businessweek, accessed January 14, 2019,
http://www.advancedsecurityprotection.com/files/stealing_white.pdf.
4 Many wonder why the reinvestment rate isn’t defined as a percentage of RCE.
Determining it as a percentage of Gross Cash Earnings works better because
RCE, being a residual income amount, is more often negative, making the outputs
meaningless.