OVER THE LAST few decades, the cost of capital has become a
commonly used benchmark for considering investment, performance
management, and valuation decisions. These days, instead of blindly
pursuing growth at any cost, many companies invest in buildings,
equipment, technologies, brands, and human talent with the expectation
of earning an adequate return on their investment. And corporate
finance principles define an “adequate return” as the cost of capital.
I began my career as a flight control system design engineer, and a
colleague once said to me, “too much is no good.” We were working
together on some design changes to an experimental plane, the X-29,
and he was describing how nearly every attempt by his team to offset
control system design deficiencies tended to overshoot and leave them
facing the opposite problem. For example, if the aircraft tended to
have too much lift when coming out of a specific maneuver, the design
fix tweaked the algorithms in the flight control computers too much
and tended to leave the aircraft with insufficient lift. Fortunately, my
colleague was working on a simulator, and these bugs were repaired
before the plane ever flew.
So it has been with the cost of capital. The intended application of
the cost of capital was as the discount rate to be used when calculating
net present value of a long-term forecast of free cash flows. Many
users of this analytical framework realized that the spread between
the average return on capital and the cost of capital, over the life of
an investment, was generally associated with net present value. That
is, when the average return on capital exceeded the cost of capital, the
NPV tended to be positive, and vice versa. As a result, many financial
analysts, both at operating companies and at investment advisory firms,
devised a shortcut whereby they would present this spread between
return on capital and cost of capital as the most important variable
in their performance scorecards. If the return spread was positive,
they took this as an unambiguous sign that value was being created.
The implications of measuring this return spread were positive
at first, but the increasing focus on ensuring a wide and expanding
positive gap between the company’s return on capital and its cost
of capital has, in many cases, gone too far. Indeed, as with my flight
control system design colleague, “too much is no good.” Far too many
management teams are overly risk averse, which discourages new
investment, and they often have become so preoccupied with beating
the cost of capital by maximizing their return on capital that they
tend to underinvest in the future of their business. The result, more
often than not, is a high near-term return on capital, but a slowdown
in capital investment, a decline in revenue growth, a weakening of
differentiation and long-term prospects, a drop in valuation multiples,
and, ultimately, poor total shareholder returns.
These managements have the right intentions, but the outcome
too often differs from their expectations. They habitually blame this
outcome on the fickle stock market, but in fact they created a valuecreation
problem by underestimating the influence of investment
and growth on TSR. They hear, and heed, the calls from investors
for more financial discipline, reduced capital spending, and a higher
return on capital. They listen to what investors say, and over time they
view capital expenditures and acquisitions as unfavorable necessities
that should be minimized.
This excessive focus on percentage rates of return and the resulting
underinvestment has led many companies to experience rising cash
balances, which leads to questions from investors about what to do
with all the cash. To add to this, historically U.S. corporate tax law has
exacerbated the problem by essentially giving companies a tax break
by not taxing cash held overseas, trapping hoards of cash in foreign
subsidiaries—though the Tax Cut and Jobs Act of 2017 largely fixed
this part of the problem.
While it may be no coincidence, this emphasis on rates of return,
the deemphasis on investing in the future, and the surplus cash situation
all developed at the same time that corporate America became
infatuated with the stock buyback. Perhaps the biggest discrepancy
between reality and common perception involves the impact of share
buybacks on shareholder value. Quite a few academic research papers
show that, on average, when a company announces a share buyback,
its share price rises. If you believe stock markets are highly efficient,
then this evidence alone is enough to convince you that buybacks are
good for the company and its owners. No doubt, the stock market is
very effective and accurate over time. But having lived through the
junk-bond bubble, the Internet bubble, the real-estate bubble, and
other less-pronounced bubbles, I am unwilling to believe it is accurate
and efficient enough to base strategy development and decisionmaking
solely on short-term stock market reactions to corporate
announcements.
The cases made for buybacks abound. Some investors and other
commentators ask questions such as, “why don’t companies buy
back more stock in their own company, which they know, rather
than buying stock in other companies they don’t know?” It is easy
to see how these buyback arguments are attractive to managements
and boards alike. This is especially so when the very same share price
reaction research is used to show that acquisitions, on average, destroy
value—as demonstrated by the tendency of share prices to drop on
the announcements of such deals.
These days, many managements devote considerable attention
to ensuring that their teams can deliver earnings per share (EPS)
that meet or exceed the consensus estimates of brokerage analysts.
In almost all cases, buying back stock lifts EPS, since the number of
shares declines and earnings hardly change. Bankers use this angle
to pitch share buybacks as a financial strategy, making it particularly
appealing to managements who use EPS as a primary measure in their
incentive compensation plans. After all, why not aim to improve the
single most discussed measure of company performance?
Taxes have also played a role. In years past, buybacks had better
tax treatment than dividends, at least for the combined company and
investor. However, the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation
Act of 2003 eliminated this tax difference. Oddly, buybacks accelerated,
growing nearly fivefold from 2003 to 2007. And over the five
years through the end of 2017, total buybacks by the 353 members
of the S&P 500 in the 2018 Fortuna Advisors Buyback ROI Report1
amounted to $2.5 trillion, 64% more than was distributed in dividends
by these companies. Total buybacks and dividends were $4.0 trillion,
which is 106% of net income over the period. Many experts claim that
corporate America is underinvesting in the future, and these figures
suggest that this may be because investments are being crowded out
by an obsession with distributing cash as dividends and buybacks.
The strategic reality is quite different when we observe what
investors do rather than what they say. A rigorous study of the performance
of companies over time shows that those who deploy more
of the cash earnings they generate to buy back stock deliver lower
TSR to shareholders.2 Our original research on this was based on the
1,000 largest nonfinancial U.S. companies as of 12/31/2009, excluding
those not public for the entire period of the study. For the five years
through 2008, the companies were separated into quartiles based on
the amount spent on buybacks as a percentage of Gross Cash Earnings.
Those directing more of their cash earnings to buybacks had
lower median TSR, and each quartile showed successively worse TSR
as the buybacks increased, as shown in figure 31.
0%
8%
26%
57%
IV
III
II
I
Quartile on Buybacks/GCE
Buybacks/Gross Cash Earnings
28%
21%
12%
-3%
Median TSR
More Buybacks
Higher TSR
Figure 31—Buyback Rate Inversely Related to TSR
How can this be? Investors say they want most companies to buy
back stock, and yet those that listen tend to do worse for shareholders.
To unpack this, let’s reflect on the case of stock buybacks at a small
private company. Consider a restaurant where you are one of five
owners, and one of the other owners seeks to exit the business and
pursue a different career path, as illustrated in figure 32.
$000s Baseline
Value
Increases
Value
Declines Buyout
Value
Increases
Value
Declines
Partner 1 (you) $200 $240 $160 $200 $250 $150
Partner 2 $200 $240 $160 $200 $250 $150
Partner 3 $200 $240 $160 $200 $250 $150
Partner 4 $200 $240 $160 $200 $250 $150
Partner 5 $200 $240 $160
Equity Value $1,000 $1,200 $800 $800 $1,000 $600
Debt $0 $0 $0 $200 $200 $200
Total Restaurant Value $1,000 $1,200 $800 $1,000 $1,200 $800
Individual Investor Returns 20% -20% 25% -25%
More
Upside
More
Downside
Situation Before Buyout Situation After Buyout
Figure 32—Restaurant Buyback Example
If you buy out the fifth partner, the restaurant will borrow the
money to pay for the repurchase of the departing partner’s shares.
The remaining partners, then, will each own one quarter of the now
somewhat leveraged business. If the purchase price is fair, and if
the value of the business stays stable, the value of your stake in the
restaurant won’t change. This can be seen by comparing the baseline
and buyout columns in the figure.
When you and your remaining partners get together to decide
whether to buy out the departing partner, and at what price, your
main consideration is the forward prospects of the business. You’re
likely to be keen to buy out your partner if you and your remaining
partners see a solid future with strong profit growth over the next few
years. If your confidence turns out to be justified, you will realize a
better upside than you would have with five partners, since the extra
value creation will be shared by four owners instead of five. This can
be seen in the figure by comparing the two Value Increases columns.
The return rises from 20% to 25% because of the leverage effect of
the debt and the reduced share count.
By contrast, perhaps a renowned chef is rumored to be launching
a new restaurant down the block, and you and your partners think
your restaurant may have seen its best days. In this case, you don’t
want to buy the partner out at anything but a very low price. You
dread the thought of looking back in a few years to see your ownership
worth a fraction of what you paid, as the decline in value would
then be shared by fewer partners (as shown in the two Value Decreases
columns). In this scenario, the leverage effect of the reduced share
count causes the negative return to decline from –20% to –25%.
For public companies, a stock buyback should be contemplated
the same way. Share price increases after a repurchase will reward the
remaining shareholders, since the gain is now divisible by fewer shares.
The converse holds for a drop in share price: Just as with gains, losses
are dispersed across fewer shares, meaning the company now is stuck
with a higher concentration of the losses. When this happens, expect
to hear groaning along the lines of: “the company repurchased 100
million shares of stock when the price was $60, and now that it’s $40,
they could have repurchased 150 million shares for the same amount.”
So, the first lesson is that investors should prefer more buybacks
when the upside seems better (when the stock price seems low), and
they should want management to avoid buybacks when the stock
price seems high and therefore when the prospects for further share
price growth are diminished. Unfortunately, this is the opposite of
what most companies do. As shown in figure 33, buybacks tend to be
higher when stock prices are high relative to history, and vice versa.
There are various explanations for why companies do a poor
job of timing buybacks. One culprit is the conventional corporate
approach to capital deployment, whereby certain uses of capital are
prioritized and management successively allocates available cash to
different possible uses.
The traditional approach follows a sequence similar to the following
prioritization. First come urgent financial needs. For companies that
are overleveraged, the initial priority is to pay down debt and establish
enough liquidity to ensure that the company remains viable. Next,
companies typically consider organic investment and, if any money
is left over, they may consider acquisitions as well. Next, or possibly
before acquisitions, the company considers dividend increases. Finally,
any money left is used for buybacks. This seems wonderfully logical—
but unfortunately, capital is typically left over for buybacks only
when the company is generating the most cash, which is also when
the stock price is usually peaking. This capital deployment strategy
often backfires because it ignores the business and market cycles and
concentrates buybacks in times when the share price is the highest.
$0.00
$0.50
$1.00
$1.50
$2.00
$2.50
$3.00
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Value of $1 Invested in the S&P 500
Net Buybacks ($ billions)
Figure 33—Net Buybacks for the S&P 500
The desire to deliver strong quarterly EPS improvements also
motivates buybacks at the peak of the market cycle. Generally, as
we approach the top of a market cycle, we also approach the top of
an economic cycle. So, though revenue and profits are still very high,
the rate of growth slows down. Corporate leaders who have become
accustomed to seeing strong quarterly EPS growth don’t really want
the party to end, so as growth in net income slows down, their motivation
remains strong to buy back shares to maintain EPS growth.
Once again, this tends to drive up the volume of buybacks at the
worst time for the remaining shareholders: when the price is highest.
The decision-making challenge at hand is complex and fraught
with all sorts of behavioral biases. We don’t really want management
to sit on excess cash, since this can serve as a slush fund to absorb
errors and can even lead to poor discipline and subpar investments,
which can invite activist investors. And the cash may be more valuable
in the hands of another management team that faces more desirable
or plentiful investment opportunities. Nor do we really want the
company to disgorge its cash when there may be better things to do
with it internally, now or in the future. We need a consistent means
of comparing past and future buybacks to other past and future uses
of capital; but unfortunately, investments tend to be evaluated using
rates of return and NPV, while buybacks are evaluated, if at all, based
on EPS accretion/dilution statistics. So, how do we compare an investment
that is expected to earn a 17% IRR to a buyback that is expected
to improve EPS by $0.02?
What’s worse, EPS accretion generally considers only the nearterm
decline in share count from the buyback. It doesn’t consider the
potential net income, had the capital been invested. In other words,
factoring EPS accretion alone ignores the opportunity cost of buying
back stock.
This capital deployment dilemma led me to develop a new
measure of a buyback program’s return on investment, which I
refer to as Buyback ROI. This measure was specifically designed
to address the above-mentioned need to make direct comparisons
of buybacks to other uses of capital, such as buying equipment or
making acquisitions. Buyback ROI reflects the annualized rate of
return, determined by comparing the capital deployed to repurchase
shares to the dividends saved, plus what the shares would be worth
at the end of the period.
Consider a company that uses $100 million to buy back five million
shares at $20 dollars a share. To keep it simple, let’s assume they don’t
pay dividends. If at the end of the year the share price is $18, the
buyback doesn’t look too good. The decline in value of $2 represents
a negative 10% Buyback ROI. Just like the restaurateurs who didn’t
want to sell high and watch the value of their restaurant fall, public
shareholders don’t want management to buy at $20 in advance of a
$2 share price decline. Had management waited, it would now be
able to buy back more shares at $18.
When calculating Buyback ROI using public information, we
would like to use the monthly number of shares and the average
share price that is reported in the quarterly 10-Q report. But, as of
this writing, this data is not captured in the Capital IQ database, so
we relied on the quarterly amount deployed to buy back shares in the
statement of cash flows. Our standard approach is to use the average
daily closing price each quarter to estimate the number of shares
purchased, which may be a bit high or low, depending on how well
managements time their buybacks within the quarter. Of course, all
the evidence points to poor buyback timing by many managements,
so our assumption may indeed make the situation look better than
it really is. But it could go the other way, too.
Some say this approach is too exposed to the whims of fickle
markets and unexpected share price movements. This is true, but
how is this different from acquiring a public company? Is the price
paid in an acquisition to be ignored because of market quirks? Of
course not, so it shouldn’t be ignored in a buyback. In fact, it is quite
possible for management to estimate a rough intrinsic value and
then to distinguish when a share price is generally high or low. This
is especially true in an environment in which the company’s shareprice
high during a given year is often 40%–50% or more above the
low for the year.3 But despite how reasonable it seems to try to time
buybacks better, managements are notoriously bad at determining
when their own share price is (too) high or low.
Coming back to Buyback ROI—we can disaggregate the measure
into the two main drivers of whether a buyback actually creates
value. The first Buyback ROI driver is Buyback Strategy, which tells
us whether a company bought back shares during a period when its
share price was generally rising. Buyback Strategy reflects the total
shareholder return, based on share price appreciation and dividends
over the period.
Predictably, companies with rapidly rising share prices tend to
have higher Buyback ROI. So, naturally, it’s a good Buyback Strategy
to repurchase shares when the share price is rising. In such situations,
reducing the share count tends to push the share price even higher,
since the quarter-by-quarter increase in market capitalization is spread
across fewer shares. Similarly, companies with falling share prices tend
to deliver a low or negative Buyback Strategy, because the decline in
market capitalization is also spread across fewer shares, accelerating
the decline in the per-share price.
The second Buyback ROI driver is Buyback Effectiveness, which is
simply the compound difference between Buyback ROI and Buyback
Strategy and reflects how well buybacks were timed, based on price
fluctuations within a given period.4 Companies that tend to buy back
more when the share price is below the overall trend, and less when
it is above, buy back more shares for the same amount. In other
words, their buybacks are more effective. It should be noted that
Buyback Effectiveness is positive whenever Buyback ROI is higher
than Buyback Strategy.
After developing these new measures of buyback success, Institutional
Investor magazine chose to publish our Buyback ROI Ranking
in its November 2012 issue. Yet, even five years later in 2017, in an
article titled “The Most and Least Effective Buyback Programs,”5
author Stephen Mintz wrote: “In fact, return measurements that are
typically applied to capital expenditures, mergers and acquisitions,
and virtually every other use of corporate capital are rarely used to
measure the value of buybacks, even though they consume equal or
greater amounts of corporate capital.” We agree.
The magazine decided to have us determine the Buyback ROI
ranking, based on the trailing two years, or eight quarters. While we
considered using a longer period to elicit more robust findings, the
editors preferred a shorter period to show results that were more
current and more relevant to their readership. We ranked only those
companies that spent an amount on buybacks that was at least 4%
of their ending market capitalization, or at least $1 billion, so as to
exclude those where the findings might be less meaningful. The first
ranking showed an average Buyback ROI of 9.7%, with an average
Buyback Strategy of 10.7% and an average Buyback Effectiveness of
–1.0%. Overall, these buybacks didn’t create or destroy much value,
as their Buyback ROIs were probably not far off the average cost of
capital; if your shareholders want to earn a 10% return and you deploy
capital at 10%, you neither create nor destroy value.
Though it seemed neutral on average, at the extremes the results
were quite different. Sunoco, the energy company, led the table with
a whopping Buyback ROI of 115.4%. It was a great time for it to
buy back stock, as shown by its Buyback Strategy of 34.2%, which
was amplified by good buyback timing, as indicated by a Buyback
Effectiveness of 60.5%.
To understand the relationship between Buyback Strategy,
Buyback Effectiveness, and Buyback ROI, it is helpful to see the math,
as shown in Figure 34.
( 1 + ) ( 1 + 34.2%) Buyback
Strategy
X ( 1 + ) ( 1 + 60.5%) Buyback
Effectiveness
= ( 1 + ) ( 1 + 115.4%) Buyback
ROI
Figure 34—Sunoco Buyback ROI as of 2012
In that inaugural 2012 ranking, the top 18 companies all had
both positive Buyback Strategy and positive Buyback Effectiveness,
meaning they timed their buybacks well, as the price was generally
rising. And the bottom 18 were all negative on both Buyback Strategy
and Buyback Effectiveness, indicating both that it was a bad time
for them to pursue buybacks generally, and that, based on the price
movements within this period, they also timed them poorly. While at
the time of this writing it seems hard to explain, Netflix was last on
the list with a Buyback ROI of –51.9%. After that, however, Netflix
delivered very strong share price performance and its Buyback ROI
improved considerably.
These rankings continued on more or less a quarterly basis in
Institutional Investor, but then Fortune Magazine picked up the ranking
for 2017 and requested a few changes. Most important, the period
evaluated was extended to five years, or 20 quarters. This decision
was made collaboratively with the editorial staff, but we at Fortuna
Advisors felt fully on board. The longer period would provide a more
robust impression of how companies were performing on buybacks,
with less influence from market volatility.
On May 1, 2017, Ryan Derousseau’s article “Stocks that Dodge
the Buyback Blues”6 appeared in print and in a longer format on
Fortune’s website. The strong stock market over the five years ending
in 2016 drove median Buyback Strategy up to 16.6%, which created a
better environment for buybacks to be successful. Unfortunately, the
ability to successfully time buybacks got worse and average Buyback
Effectiveness dropped to –4.3%. Almost a third of the median positive
buyback strategy was consumed by poor buyback timing, and
median Buyback ROI diminished to just 11.2%. These returns were
still slightly positive for shareholders, but could have been improved
with better timing.
The second Fortune article, “Why Stock Market Buybacks Should
Make Investors Nervous,”7 again authored by Ryan Derousseau, was
published on April 20, 2018. It showed that median Buyback ROI rose
from 11.2% in the prior ranking to 13.8% for the five years ending
in 2017. By sorting companies into high, medium, and low groups
based on their buybacks over the five years as a percentage of recent
market capitalization, we were able to measure whether companies
doing more or fewer buybacks had better median Buyback ROI. We
found that the high-buyback group had the lowest median Buyback
ROI, Buyback Strategy, and Buyback Effectiveness. This, of course,
was very bad news for investors who advocate heavy use of buybacks.
As we have learned already, too much is no good.
We developed Buyback ROI during a bull market and, as of this
writing, the bull is still charging ahead. This has served as wind at
the back of the massive corporate buyback programs. But how will
these enormous buyback programs that were executed in 2018 look
through the Buyback ROI lens after the next market downturn? People
sometimes quip that there are two certainties in life, death and taxes.
But they should add a third certainty: cycles. Ever since there has
been an economy, it has gone through cycles, and the stock markets
also go through cycles. After every upturn in the past, a downturn
has always followed, then after that another upturn (and so on, into
infinity). Everyone knows this, but few behave accordingly.
As discussed above, perhaps the worst part of this buyback mania
may be how buybacks have crowded out good investment in operations,
thereby depleting the potential future value of growth. At first, I
was somewhat apprehensive about my hypothesis that buybacks were
impeding good investments. Though the numbers seemed to support
that view, I couldn’t envision any meaningful number of executives
deliberately underinvesting so that they could pursue more buybacks
and elevate short-term EPS. Then a series of corporate experiences
provided the confirmation I had been seeking.
My former partner, John Cryan, and I were looking for a way
to bridge the gap between the notions that “Buybacks lead to worse
TSR” and “Buybacks increase EPS.” John began testing changes in
PE multiples for companies that did or did not do buybacks. While
it was his idea, we worked together on the research and published
our findings that, on average, PE multiples declined relative to those
of the overall market for companies doing heavy buybacks.8 The
more that EPS increased from repurchasing shares, the less valuable
each dollar of incremental EPS became. Our study showed that each
increment of EPS growth from buybacks was worth about half as
much as EPS growth from profitable revenue growth together with
operational improvements.
This was significant to us because, as former investment bankers,
we had participated in many client meetings where the industry
bankers and financial strategy experts expressed some variant of the
following: “If your EPS rises by 15%, and if we assume the PE multiple
stays the same, then your share price should also rise by 15%.” It seemed
to management like a pretty easy way to boost the share price. Back at
the office, we often wondered why they would assume the PE multiple
would stay the same. When we would ask them, the response was
“why not?” Now we had evidence that the PE multiple declines, on
average. But we are quite sure few bankers have changed their story.
OK, so I get a little intense when it comes to buybacks. At least
that’s what I was told by friends who read my debate with Whitney
Tilson that was published as “The Pros and Cons of Stock Buybacks” in
The Wall Street Journal.9 But who wouldn’t be intense if they discovered
that companies were deploying an average of half a trillion dollars
each year to do something that often hurts investors?
This is not to say that companies should avoid distributing cash
to investors when they have a surplus and foresee few promising
investment opportunities. But by doing this through buybacks, they
are imposing price risk on their remaining shareholders. Given the
preponderance of poorly timed buyback programs, a less risky way
for them to distribute cash to investors is a special dividend, through
which all shareholders receive the same treatment. Unfortunately, two
major obstacles stand in the way. First, the special dividend imposes
a tax event on the investor, whereas buybacks allow the investor to
choose whether they want to sell and trigger a tax event. Either they
get the cash if they sell into the buyback, or they get the potential
benefit of a reduced share count if they don’t.
The second problem is much larger, and it is the main reason
we seldom see special dividends. Long-term incentives in the form
of restricted stock, performance shares, and stock options are rarely
insulated from special dividends. For example, consider stock options.
Standard dividends reduce the valuation of stock options since the
likelihood of share-price appreciation is reduced by the payment of
dividends. Since each option is worth less, managers tend to be given
more stock options when the company pays dividends. So, the present
value of what is delivered to them is unaffected by the dividend.
There is no easy way to factor in potential (future) special dividends
at the time of granting, so when special dividends are paid, the value
of all long-term incentives declines.
Imagine a share price of $20 and a special dividend of $2. Typically,
the share price declines all or most of the way on the ex-dividend
day—that is, the day the dividend is locked in even if the stock is sold.
If management holds stock options with an exercise price of $16, the
day the special dividend is paid they forfeit half of the in-the-money
value. Management wouldn’t want that, so they prefer stock buybacks.
It shouldn’t be hard to change the language in long-term incentive
contracts to prevent these distorted incentives, yet few companies
have done so.
The process for capital deployment decision-making includes
making estimates of all sources of capital, including operating cash
flow, cash expected from transactions, cash in the bank, and potential
borrowings—and then determining the best way to deploy this capital
across the company’s opportunities for organic investment, acquisitions,
buyback, dividends, and debt repayment. Many companies get
this process wrong every year.
Key Capital Deployment Principles
The golden rule of capital deployment, whether we are considering
capital expenditures, acquisitions, or buying back our own shares, is
that value is created only when we buy something that turns out to
be worth more than what we paid. If we are interested in long-term
sustainable value creation, what matters is what it’s worth over the
long haul, not the day after we buy it.
There seem to be many more executives who can recite this simple
NPV rule than can actually follow it. Few deliberately ignore it. But
executives are human and face all sorts of real-world pressures and
obstacles. So, while they all mean to do the right thing, they often
can’t help themselves.
As discussed in chapter 1, the field of behavioral finance can
help explain why investor and managerial behavior often deviates
from maximizing NPV or even self-interest. Remember that recency
bias suggests that we often extrapolate recent events into the future.
From a capital deployment perspective, this leads to investing too
much, both organically and in acquisitions, at the top of the cycle
(when assets are most expensive). Other behavioral biases, such as
“loss aversion,” exacerbate this tendency by causing procrastination
and “analysis paralysis,” rather than decisive action. Leverage, too,
can play a part by amplifying the effects of this loss aversion and thus
further slowing down the decision process.
Another critical behavior bias is “herding,” in which executives
find it easier to follow what others are doing, or seem to be doing.
This bias leads to poorly thought-out capital deployment strategies
that mimic the behavior of others in the industry. Few executives
feel comfortable standing out from the pack, which also of course
has to do with loss aversion. Many managers are so loss-averse and
concerned with self-preservation that they appear to be content to
just hand money back to investors. This may seem like a conservative
and prudent decision, but it often leads to underinvestment.
And managers’ incentives may be, or at least are perceived to be,
asymmetric with more downside than upside. Many executives
have observed early in their careers that even small failures are
punished more than successes are rewarded, and the result is a
conditioned reluctance to pursue any growth investment with an
expected outcome that is less than certain.
In addition to these biases, organizations experience all sorts of
office politics, power struggles, and bureaucratic restraints that also
lead to “groupthink,” maintenance of the status quo, and the stifling
of alternative or dissenting ideas. These effects can all severely restrict
the creativity and innovation that should fuel growth.
Most of us, at least at times, fall prey to the likes of recency bias,
loss aversion, herding, and poor understanding of business cycles.
Luckily, we can develop fact-based capital deployment policies and
processes that help overcome these natural biases and steer us toward
doing what is right for investors.
It was shown earlier in figure 33 that buybacks tend to happen
when prices are high, despite the fact that most managers understand
they can buy back more and deliver more benefit to their shareholders
if they’re patient and avoid buybacks around the peaks.
As shown in figure 35, a similar relationship exists for acquisitions;
that is, companies commit more capital to acquiring other companies
when they’re expensive than when they’re cheap. This would indicate
that companies are either not considering or unable to perceive
macro price and market trends when making acquisitions. In certain
years, companies have overpaid by billions of dollars by ignoring this
principle of “buy low, sell high.” Of course, in the middle of a sharp
downturn, such as the 2009 financial crisis, it is difficult to summon
the confidence to make a large, acquisitive bet—unless your name
is Warren Buffett. But why was almost twice as much invested in
acquisitions in 2007 than in 2005, or in 2016 than in 2013?
$0.00
$0.50
$1.00
$1.50
$2.00
$2.50
$3.00
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Value of $1 Invested in the S&P 500
Cash Acquisitions ($ billions)
Figure 35—Cash Acquisitions for the S&P 500
If we care about the difference between the value of what we
get versus what we pay, then buybacks and acquisitions shouldn’t
be concentrated at the top of the market cycle when prices are the
highest. At a minimum, they should be spread somewhat evenly over
the cycle. To achieve this requires capital deployment processes that
are explicitly designed to overcome our natural human biases when
they would lead us to suboptimal choices.
It is easy to be overwhelmed by the complexity of capital deployment.
There is a certain amount of cash available from operations, and
the company can borrow more, sell stock, or divest existing businesses
to generate more for allocation. This capital can be used to invest
organically or in acquisitions, to pay dividends or buy back stock, or
to adjust the capital structure by accumulating cash or paying down
debt. As shown in figure 36, two important decisions drive the process.
First, we must assess whether there are current desirable investment
opportunities; second, if there are no such opportunities, we must
assess whether future ones can be expected.
Investment
Sources of Capital
Flexibility Distribution
Cash from
Operations
Cash from
Financing
Cash from
Divestments
Current
Investment
Opportunities
?
Future
Investment
Opportunities
?
Organic Growth
Acquisitive
Growth
Pay Down Debt
Build Cash
Dividends
Share
Repurchases
Yes
No
No
Yes
Figure 36—The Sources and Uses of Capital
The process seems simple—just two straightforward questions
to answer. But every source and use of capital is as dynamic and
subject to change as the critical internal and external factors that
tend to drive such decisions. And to further complicate the matter,
many of these factors interact. Perhaps a consumer staples business
has suffered a 15% decline in its share price due to a negative market
reaction to a recently announced acquisition. At this lower valuation,
buybacks may look attractive; but as a result of the financing
commitment to fund the announced acquisition, the company would
need to borrow to fund the buyback, which may push credit stats
below the desired range. Management decides against a buyback.
Would the answer be different if the share price fell 25% and thus
created more upside for the buybacks? What if the share price fell
by half, or more?
Or consider a hot retail business that has readily found and invested
in new store opportunities that have delivered consistent 25%–30%
cash returns. The company is innovative and successful at marketing,
so the returns are expected to be sustainable. These returns are on
the order of three times the required return of 8%–10%, and an NPV
analysis shows that each dollar the company invests in new stores
turns into three dollars of present value. The store footprint is still
rather small, so there appears to be a lot of runway to keep opening
value-creating stores for years to come.
A competitor becomes available for sale, and management considers
acquiring it since it is convinced it can run that brand better. But to
complete the acquisition would absorb so much human and financial
capital that it would slow the expansion of the existing brand. The
question in this case is not whether the NPV from the acquisition is
positive; it is whether the NPV is sufficiently positive to make up for
the lost NPV from slowing the growth rate of the existing business.
This type of analysis can be performed to evaluate alternative investment
decisions and the opportunity costs associated with them—in
this case weighing organic versus acquisitive growth. Consider how
the decision would differ if the base business were mature and had
few growth opportunities. Then there is a much lower threshold
before the acquisition creates value.
Ten Key Principles for Effective Capital Deployment
Complexity is best dealt with by establishing principles to guide
management and designing processes to rigorously follow those principles.
The following 10 key principles for effective capital deployment
provide the foundation for establishing an enduring capital deployment
process to drive long-term value creation.
Principle 1—The Top Priority Is Survival: In order to have the opportunity
to achieve success, company leadership must first circumvent complete
failure by ensuring business survival. Management must avoid excessive
risk-taking, provide adequate financing capacity and liquidity, and protect
important tangible and intangible assets, including key personnel, brands,
technologies, and other essential differentiators. Many business failures
are avoidable with adequate forethought and planning, but most truly
difficult challenges come from underestimating change. For example,
companies producing record albums when CDs were introduced in 1984
probably expected a more gradual transition, but what they got was an
abrupt upheaval. By 1990, most music was purchased in the form of CDs.
And then CDs were replaced by electronic content ownership, which has
now been replaced by streaming. What’s next?
Survival is the top priority, for obvious reasons, but most managements
don’t pay enough attention to change. Management must devote
resources to identifying potential threats to survival and then act to get
ahead of change and turn these potential threats into opportunities.
The biggest obstacle, of course, is short-termism, which is reinforced
by overconfidence, procrastination, and a distaste for cannibalizing
existing products or services. It also doesn’t help that many managers
feel they can readily influence their own short-term compensation
but often view long-term incentives as a bit of a lottery. Management
processes and incentive compensation must be structured to explicitly
address and reduce the impact of each of these obstacles.
Principle 2—Buy Low and Sell High, Really: To emphasize NPV
in capital deployment requires a mindset of always buying low and
selling high. In the movie Caddyshack, Rodney Dangerfield bellowed
into his golf bag phone, “What’s that? Then sell! Oh, they’re selling?
Then buy!” Audiences laughed because of the absurdity, but also
because of the cliché. Still, clichés are clichés for a reason, and the
value of selling when others are buying, and vice versa, is obvious to
the vast majority of investors. But we know from the previous discussions
of buybacks and acquisitions that corporate executives tend to
do the opposite of Rodney’s maxim. It can sometimes be difficult to
tell when prices are too high or low, so executives must pay careful
attention to cycles and rely on thoughtful analysis to actually buy or
sell assets when prices are favorable.
One important way to do this is to explicitly factor the expectation
of operational, financial, and other cycles into planning and
decision-making. One oil and gas CFO explained how he uses the
same midrange oil price when considering the acquisition of new oil
and gas reserves, regardless of where the industry is in the commodity
price cycle. This way, he tends to buy more reserves when they are
cheap and fewer when they are expensive. For companies in industries
that don’t experience much cyclicality in financial performance, it is
still important to pay attention to market cycles. From the 2007 peak
to the trough of the market in the 2009 financial crisis, the median
utility company suffered TSR of –41%. Utilities are not viewed as
being cyclical. Indeed, the median utility, Exelon, saw its EPS increase
slightly from $4.03 to $4.09 from 2007 to 2009, a period when its
EBITDA increased 9.5%. So why was its TSR –41%? Market fear.
Exelon acquired no competitors that year, but perhaps it could have
improved its long-run performance by buying a very stable competitor
that would have essentially been on sale.
Principle 3—Don’t Follow the Crowd: Make it a strong policy to
never select capital deployment choices because some loud shareholders
ask you to do it, or because bankers say everyone is doing it, or
because you overheard on the golf course or at the yacht club that
your rival is doing it. Did Warren Buffett see everyone buying railroads
in 2009 when he announced the investment of $34 billion to buy the
Burlington and Northern Santa Fe railroad? Doubtful. In fact, it was
that everyone lost interest in railroads that created the opportunity.
Did he care what the immediate investor reaction would be, or did
he focus exclusively on whether he could buy an asset for anything
less than his assessment of its long-term intrinsic value? We seek to
make capital deployment choices that create value whether or not
they are perceived as “trending.” And indeed the best investments are
often not trending; good—that is, value-creating—ideas that everyone
is pursuing aren’t value-creating for long.
This contrarian mindset is not new. In 1841, Charles Mackay
published Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds,
which discusses Dutch tulip-mania, the South Sea Company bubble,
and numerous other examples where the crowd, or the market for our
purposes, got it wrong. Market bubbles are an unbelievably interesting
deviation from long-run market efficiency, and Mackay’s book offers
one of the earliest commentaries on the subject. What’s most useful
for corporate managers is to understand the innate desire to follow
the crowd. This type of “herding” can be seen today by both companies
and investors in the market. For those who were old enough at
the time, look back at the Internet bubble and think about the typical
business news commentary in those days. The repetitive buzzing of
“profits don’t matter anymore, it’s about clicks and eyeballs” fueled an
emotional response of not wanting to miss out. This fear of missing out
feeling, or FOMO, afflicted even the well-schooled in finance, valuation,
and basic economics, among other less sophisticated investors. Capital
deployment processes must explicitly contemplate emotional bubbles
and their effect on the likely trends and opportunities to be managed.
Principle 4—Investment Usually Outperforms Financial Engineering:
Much more long-term value comes from investment and
execution than from financial engineering. In the very same study and
article behind figure 31, we showed the positive relationship between
investment in the business and TSR, as shown in figure 37.
19%
44%
68%
115%
IV
III
II
I
Quartile on Investments/GCE
Investment/Gross Cash Earnings
-3%
12%
25%
34%
Median TSR
More Investment
Higher TSR
Figure 37—Reinvestment Rate Positively Related to TSR
Investment creates value, on average, because it’s not a zerosum
game; and companies, on average, deliver returns well above
the required return demanded by investors. Managers need to be
disciplined, since it’s easy to make bad investments, but this should
only lead them to be extra careful rather than leading them to avoid
making investments altogether. As long as the incremental return is
above the required return, managers should drive the reinvestment
rate as high as possible.
Principle 5—Prioritize Organic Investment: Virtually all great business
success stories began with some form of organic investment,
especially investments that increase differentiation through innovation
and branding. So organic investments should always be given priority
over acquisitive investments. The range of organic investment opportunities
is wide. It includes projects that are familiar, have reasonable
risk exposures, and are expected to produce decent, but not extreme,
upside potential, such as expanding production capacity, improving
efficiency and productivity, and updating the look and feel of retail
stores, restaurants, and hotels. These can be classified as either doing
more of what we already do or doing what we do better.
Opportunities also exist to invest in less familiar areas, sometimes
taking on greater risks and potentially realizing extremely substantial
returns. This can include the development of new products and
services, the marketing launch of totally new or significantly rejuvenated
brands, or the expansion of delivering products and services to
new geographies. For example, consider a pharmaceutical company
that contemplates investing for many years in expensive scientific
research with the hope of developing a new drug that then requires
tremendous research and marketing to ensure efficacy, navigate regulatory
approval, and bring the treatment to market. Every company
should dedicate at least a reasonable portion of its investment budget
to higher risk-reward areas; and for those with existing commercial
products and services, there will usually be plenty of opportunity to
make lower risk-reward investments to drive the existing business
forward. But both the low- and high-risk organic investments should
be prioritized over acquisitive investment.
Principle 6—Be Willing to Grow Carefully by Acquisition and
Shrink Through Divestitures or Spinoffs: It has become a bit of a
business cliché to say that “most acquisitions destroy value.” Fortunately,
this is not true, generally. The vast majority of our capital
market research across industries and varying time periods shows that
those investing more in acquisitions do, on average, deliver higher
average TSR. We all know of spectacular acquisition failures, such as
the 1998 acquisition of Chrysler by Daimler and the 2010 acquisition
of Palm by HP—both deals that turned out terribly for the acquirer in
rapid fashion. These, and other such disasters, make for eye-catching
news headlines but are truly a small minority of cases.
Although acquisitions should be a second priority behind organic
investment, it is quite possible to build a successful acquisition track
record. Like learning all other skills, acquisition expertise requires
development and practice. This is why serial acquirers tend to perform
better than occasional acquirers. It is also critical to align acquisition
strategy with business strategy, as will be discussed in chapter 11.
Companies should actively monitor a list of potential targets and
constantly grade them on fit and desirability, as indicated by the value
expected to be received in relation to the price. Success is much less
likely with such a deliberate process versus when deals originate
with a banker stopping by with a pitch book of ideas, or an offering
memorandum on a company that wasn’t otherwise contemplated by
the acquirer. It’s like having a real estate agent regularly show you
and your family houses that are available—you may end up moving
to a bigger and more expensive house that you weren’t even thinking
about beforehand.
Principle 7—Leverage Tends to Stifle Investment: Maintaining
high debt leverage can be a bigger problem than buybacks in some
companies. In good times, leverage seems good. If our business is
growing strongly with nice profit margins and decent rates of return,
having more leverage will amplify the EPS growth rate, and TSR will
often follow it, to at least some degree. But if, or frankly when, the
economy falters, the industry loses momentum, or our company
suffers a competitive setback, perhaps due to a new competitive product
that leapfrogs our own, then the leverage will amplify the downside
just as it did the upside. From the S&P 500 peak on October 9, 2007,
through the trough on March 9, 2009, the S&P 500 fell 57%. In most
sectors, the companies that had higher total debt as a percentage of
EBITDA at the start of the market downturn had worse TSR over
the 17-month period than their less-levered peers. The most notable
exception to this was healthcare, which is one of the least cyclical of
industries.
What’s worse is that the amount of debt leverage seems to also
have a negative impact on the willingness to invest in growth. This
is unbelievably important, yet generally goes unrecognized. Many
corporate finance experts claim that having more debt creates value
by causing a reduction in the weighted average cost of capital and
showing how the present value of free cash flow rises; but they fail to
incorporate the effect the debt has on the amount of long-term free
cash flow. Companies faced with the financial risk associated with
high debt levels tend to invest less in the business, and this behavioral
effect can make the company value drop even though the company
has reduced the weighted average cost of capital.
Principle 8—Implement Buyback Execution Rules: The goal of
buybacks should be to create value for the remaining shareholders by
buying back shares that management believes are worth more than
what must be paid to repurchase them. It’s no different from buying
stock in another company.
To combat the tendency of companies to buy back more stock
when it’s expensive than when it’s cheap, as discussed above, companies
should implement rules-based processes for executing stock
buybacks, as will be discussed in chapter 12. It’s important to recognize
that companies pursuing buybacks tend to suffer declines in
their price-to-earnings valuation multiple; so perhaps companies
should mandate that the words “buyback” and “EPS” never be
mentioned in the same meeting—whoever breaks this rule has to
put $20 in the holiday luncheon fund. At least for the first year of
this policy, this should provide a tidy sum for some joyous celebrating
at year-end.
Principle 9—Dividends Are Value Neutral: Potentially the most
misunderstood use of capital is the dividend, which is only a means
of giving shareholders access to money they already own. Nothing
more, nothing less. By definition, dividend policy cannot create longterm
value. There is a theory that dividends communicate confidence
in the business, and sometimes this is true. But, frankly, a faltering
dividend trend is more likely to convey a lack of confidence. As will
be discussed in chapter 12, dividends are more an outcome of capital
deployment strategy than they are a strategy in and of themselves.
One potentially beneficial, but rarely tapped, use of dividends is
as a better alternative to stock buybacks when a company wants to
distribute excess capital while its share price is above the midpoint of
the market cycle. This still isn’t true value creation; it’s the avoidance
of the value destruction that would come from buying back what will
later seem to have been overpriced shares.
Principle 10—Value Creation Is Hard Work: Recognize that there
are no tricks, easy paths, or quick fixes. For example, if the company’s
earnings have been growing for a few years, but now the economy
is peaking and earnings growth is slowing, a quick fix to boost next
quarter’s EPS by repurchasing a boatload of stock may give the share
price a pop on the date of announcement. But over the ensuing cycle,
management and shareholders alike will probably regret the move and
wish management had held the cash to be used when assets, including
the company’s own share price, were more attractively priced.
A Dynamic and Integrated Capital Deployment Process
Capital should be earmarked for areas where it can provide the most
benefit, rather than being smeared indiscriminately across a broad
range of opportunities. To this end, the foundation for a successful
capital deployment process requires insights into the company’s
sources of success and failure. Such insights entail an understanding
of performance both across the company and in comparison to
competitors, customers, and suppliers. In which business areas do
we have strong strategic positions in attractive markets where we
can earn high sustainable returns—and more important, why? Do
we have the most sought-after product features, the most ardently
desired brand, the most comprehensive distribution network, or
some other source of competitive advantage that allows us to price
at a premium in relation to costs, including our cost of capital? With
a broad understanding of the sources of value-creation success and
failure, we are better equipped to allocate resources to their best
possible uses.
The market environment, the industry, and indeed everything
inside the company is dynamic. The pace of disruption has accelerated
in recent decades and is likely to continue to do so in the future. It is
not enough to look backward when formulating capital deployment
strategy; we must also constantly monitor changes and new developments,
and be ready to adjust the capital deployment plan in real
time. A contemplated acquisition could suddenly be more attractively
priced, which could crowd out other capital uses or draw down on
available debt capacity. Or a competitor may launch an unexpected,
new and improved offering in direct competition with our strongest
product, requiring us to accelerate our own innovation projects, step
up marketing, and compete more aggressively on price until our own
superior products are available. Some sectors and industries are more
dynamic than others and require greater financial flexibility as well
as a more active real-time capital deployment process to be able to
seize opportunities and react to threats.
Far too many companies view the various areas of capital deployment
as separate processes, without recognizing and dealing with
their interrelationships. How much we invest organically affects what
we have available to invest acquisitively, while our total investment
commitment affects cash and debt balances along with the ability to
devote capital to buybacks and dividends. But we often see operations
managers handling a share of the organic investment, with the rest
being managed by marketing and product research departments, all
independently, while acquisitions are contemplated by a corporate
development group. Often the treasury group manages capital structure
and liquidity, and leads the discussion of stock buybacks and
dividend increases, with the investor relations group having a say in
the latter. Surely the people leading these groups talk to each other
and share information, in most cases. Yet many companies lack a truly
integrated and dynamic capital deployment process that captures and
prioritizes all the possibilities and that simultaneously determines
the best combination of sources and uses of capital to maximize the
future value of the company.
As with much of what has been discussed so far, capital deployment
is often considered over too short a period, as well. Sure, there
are 10- or 20-year free cash flow forecasts with NPV calculations for
new production facilities, but the overall capital deployment plan
rarely seems to be considered in the context of a full cyclical view.
For example, say our team is a little short on new investment ideas to
fund right now, but over the last decade we have generally had plenty
of opportunity to make good investments. So, perhaps we should
reduce the investment budget for the time being, but hold the excess
in reserve either as cash in the bank or as unutilized debt capacity. The
next time opportunities present themselves, possibly when our team
comes up with better organic investment ideas or when competitors
are cheaper to acquire during an industry or market downturn, we
will have the financing capacity to seize the day.
This may seem a difficult practice to follow, given the threat that
an activist investor might come in and demand that the company
lever up to buy back stock. For companies that have consistently
earned well above the cost of capital, have grown, and have delivered
strong TSR, such a strategy might well be defended successfully
against the most ardent opposition. Yet for companies that
have routinely underperformed, the activist is likely to have a point.
Maybe the value of maintaining financial firepower is limited and
perhaps even value-destroying, since there is a high risk of bad
investments in the future. Or maybe management simply needs
to earn the right to grow.
The good old net-present-value rule should guide all decisions and
should be applied by determining the amount of NPV per dollar of
capital being deployed, which is the RCE Profitability Index (discussed
in the next chapter). For anyone with finance experience, the application
of NPV to organic and acquisitive investments is straightforward.
Dividends have zero net present value unless they trigger taxes that
could have been deferred. And, much like acquisitions, buybacks deliver
a positive or a negative NPV to the remaining shareholders, based
on the difference between the price of the shares and their cyclically
adjusted intrinsic value. When the share price is unusually low, the
potential value creation from buybacks might be greater than some
of the otherwise desirable investments in the business. But when
the share price is high, the opposite is true. Cash and debt levels can
affect NPV, as well, since they can influence the required return and
valuation. The prioritization of opportunities should be an ongoing
process, and the dynamics of the market and the business will cause
priorities to shift.
The process will vary somewhat by industry and even by company.
But capital deployment planning should always start with a thorough
understanding of where value is created and where destroyed. Corporate
leaders must recognize that the world is dynamic and always be
ready and willing to change their capital deployment plans in real time.
The processes for managing sources and uses of capital should be integrated
by a capital deployment oversight group that manages priorities
and tradeoffs. At most companies, this is the executive committee.
Decisions must be made in the context of both near- and longer-term
expectations. In the end, however, all capital deployment decisions
should be aimed at maximizing net present value.
Notes
1 “2018 Fortuna Buyback ROI Report,” accessed January 14, 2019, https://
fortunedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2018/04/2018-fortuna-buyback-roireport.
pdf.
Note that this study includes all companies in the S&P 500 that bought back at
least $1 billion worth of stock or at least 4% of their ending market capitalization
over the five-year period.
2 Gregory V. Milano, “Are Buybacks the Best We Can Do?,” Buona Fortuna, February
16, 2010.
3 In 2018, for example, the median company in the Russell 1000 had a 52-week
high that was 52% higher than the 52-week low. This figure was 41% in 2017 and
54% in 2016.
4 The concept of Buyback Effectiveness was originally suggested by my former
partner at Fortuna Advisors, Steve Treadwell.
5 S. L. Mintz, “The Most and Least Effective Stock Buyback Programs,” Institutional
Investor, September 30, 2017, accessed January 15, 2019, https://www.
institutionalinvestor.com/article/b14zpnbhzxyk7q/the-most-and-least-effectivestock-
buyback-programs.
6 Ryan Derousseau, “4 ‘Buyback’ Stocks Worth Buying,” Fortune, accessed January
15, 2019, http://fortune.com/2017/04/26/best-buyback-stocks-trump-bump/.
7 Ryan Derousseau, “Why Stock Market Buybacks Should Make Investors Nervous,”
Fortune, accessed January 15, 2019, http://fortune.com/2018/04/20/stock-marketbuybacks-
nervous/.
8 Gregory V. Milano and John R. Cryan, “Advocates Overrating the Benefits of
Buybacks,” CFO.com, October 17, 2012, accessed January 15, 2019, http://ww2.
cfo.com/cash-flow/2012/10/advocates-overrating-the-benefits-of-buybacks/.
9 Maxwell Murphy, “The Pros and Cons of Stock Buybacks,” Wall Street Journal,
February 27, 2012, accessed January 15, 2019, https://www.wsj.com/articles/
SB10001424052970203824904577213891035614390.