What is Elanco Cash Earnings (ECE)?
Elanco Cash Earnings or “ECE” is a simple and comprehensive measure that will provide better insights into where value is being created or destroyed as it “dollarizes” into one metric the trade-offs between growth, returns and cash flow. ECE tells you whether the value of your outputs exceed the value of your inputs and compares that value creation to what you could have generated had you invested in another alternative. ECE is a cash-based measure of economic profit where “up is good”, and “down is bad.” Improving ECE is what matters most! We believe this measure will be fundamental in our drive to increase top line growth through innovation, improve margins, and deleverage through better working capital and cash management.
How do I calculate ECE?
We start with the familiar measure EBITDA (Earnings Before Interest Tax Depreciation and Amortization), add back R&D, and then subtract taxes, which give us “Gross Cash Earnings” (GCE, which is a measure of “profit”). 

We then compare this to the capital charge, which represents the required return (or GCE or “profit”) investors expect to achieve given the amount they have invested in the business. The capital charge is investors’ required return of 8.5% multiplied by the Gross Operating Assets (GOA). GOA consists of the operating assets of the business (i.e., Net Working Capital, Gross Property Plant and Equipment, Capitalized R&D). Since we don’t expense R&D, we capitalize 8 years of R&D expense and treat it as an investment. This encourages management to invest in growth but at the same time holds management accountable for generating a return on the R&D that has been invested. 

Finally, subtracting the capital charge from GCE gives us ECE, as shown below, which tells you how much GCE or “profit” you generated relative to the amount of GCE or “profit” investors expected given the amount of GOA they invested in the business. 

Gross Cash Earnings
(GCE)		Capital Charge		Elanco Cash Earnings
(ECE)
										
	Revenue	$ 2,300								
-	Expenses	$ 2,000			Operating Assets	$600				
	EBITDA	$ 300		+	Capitalized R&D	$400				
+	R&D	$ 50			Gross Operating Assets	$1,000			GCE	$311
-	Taxes	$ 39		x	Required Return	8.5%		-	Capital Charge	$85
	GCE	$311			Capital Charge	$85			ECE	$226
My team is not numerically focused. Is there a way to explain ECE to my team in words, not numbers?
There are a variety of different ways ECE can be explained in words. We have included a number of these below for you to use in discussions with your team depending on the audience: 
•	You don’t need to know how to calculate ECE to improve ECE. Acting like an owner and ECE are two sides of the same coin. If you act as a One Elanco owner, ECE will be improved and value will be created, and if you purposefully increase ECE you will be acting like an owner. 
•	ECE tells you whether the value of your outputs exceed the value of your inputs and compares that value creation to what you could have generated had you invested in another alternative.
•	ECE can explained through a simple laundromat example. Let’s say that over the last 10 years you’ve been invested in the stock market, and the company you have chosen to invest in is a publicly traded laundromat company. You’ve done pretty well with this investment; you’ve earned a return of 8.5% every year.  Sadly, you recently received an inheritance of $1,000 from a distant relative. Because you have studied the laundromat industry and understand the business inside and out, and developed a passion for it, you decide to open your own laundromat with the $1,000 inheritance by investing into the assets needed to start your business (a washer and a dryer). To create value, you must be able to earn a return better than your next best alternative – which in this case, is investing in the public laundromat company with a return of 8.5% or $85 based on your $1,000 investment. Economically speaking, this $85 is the minimum amount of money you would expect to generate to justify starting this new business instead of investing in the public company. It turns out that you were able to generate $311 of “profit” so your ECE is the difference between what you generated in “profit” ($311) versus what “profit” you could have generated in the publicly traded laundromat business ($85). As a result, you generated $226 of ECE ($311 - $85). This is how an owner thinks. If an owner has to provide capital to run a business, that owner expects a return – and the same is true for Elanco and its investors!
Why is Elanco adopting ECE? How does ECE drive One Elanco?
ECE will help us continue our journey to a true One Elanco ownership culture, enabling our vision of food and companionship enriching life. ECE is the engine that will drive One Elanco, where improving ECE rewards the following traits of an owner: 

1.	Spend money like it’s your own
2.	Extreme Prioritization
3.	Willingness to fail
4.	More doing and less talking
5.	Managing both the short and long-term
What does an ownership culture (or acting like an owner) mean at Elanco?
Very broadly, an ownership culture is one in which every employee owns their decisions and the results and consequences of their actions. While there are many traits associated with ownership, Fortuna has identified five of the most important: spend money like it’s your own, extreme prioritization, willingness to fail, more doing and less talking, and balancing the long and short-term. Embracing an ownership culture by embodying these traits requires substantial effort but also yields substantial benefits. We also note that an ownership culture dovetails well with Elanco’s Cultural and Behavioral Pillars:
 

I get this for Elanco as a whole, but how do I make it relevant for my team? Can any individual or cost center in our organization influence ECE? 
Yes! All Elanco employees and teams can directly influence ECE by thinking like an owner in each decision they make in their day-to-day roles. See below for examples of decisions that can benefit from an ECE perspective. Our challenge to you and your team is to think like an owner and about ECE-positive decisions you could make in your business area!

Operating Level	Business-Unit Level	Corporate Level
Spend management	Make versus buy decisions	Acquiring a business
Managing inventory	Managing product lifecycles	Divesting non-core assets
Supplier contract terms	Setting product prices	Entering a new geography
Making an equipment purchase	Optimizing sales force	Entering a new market segment
Distributor payment terms	Adding human resources	Allocating capital to R&D
Timing of purchases	Streamlining facilities footprint	Prioritizing R&D projects
		
		…and many more!


ECE sounds great but are there other companies using it? 
In large part, measures like ECE stay uncommon because compensation metrics are often based on competitive pay practices that don’t encourage an ownership mindset. Strategy 101 suggests that any sustainable competitive advantage comes from possessing resources and processes, both tangible and intangible that are difficult to replicate. When realized, a ECE transformation impacts all facets of a business, where long-term value creation becomes the driving force of the organization, touching almost every aspect of business in a beneficial and profound way, that to replicate it or imitate it is very difficult. This provides a competitive advantage that will help a company dominate their respective industry.

A simple search of proxy statements for the terms “economic value added” or as it’s more commonly known, “economic profit,” yields 1,502 companies. In some cases a company will simply list “economic value added” and “economic profit” as a possible performance goal alongside other measures of performance. And although companies may have not fully adopted this measure for incentive compensation purposes, it does suggest that many companies recognize the measure as a viable metric for evaluating and rewarding executive performance.” (Source: CFO.com)

The spectrum of adopters ranges from companies with a back-office analyst that calculates it once a year as a footnote to some obscure analysis that is never seen, to those companies that are compensated on it, trained on it, use it in their daily operating decisions and make it part of the discussion in every high-level executive meeting. One great example is Ball Corporation, that has used an ECE-like measure for approximately 30 years. Varian Medical System implemented their version of ECE to much success (before their well-received recent acquisition), where they almost doubled the value of their business within 3 years. 

Is senior leadership bought in to ECE?
Yes. Senior leadership (and the Board) are fully committed to embracing ECE and an ownership culture. This move is also motivated in part the board’s desire to implement a strong link between compensation and share price performance.

If I have other questions that aren’t answered here, who can I reach out to?
You can reach out to your manager or your Elanco Cash Earnings Senior Advisory Team (ESAT) member (listed below) with any additional questions! 

ESAT Member Name	Business Area	Email Address
Kristin Bloink	Research & Development	kristin.bloink@elancoah.com

Blake Everhart	US Commercial	BLAKE.EVERHART@elancoah.com

Chris Keeley	Information Technology	chris.keeley@elancoah.com

Sebastian Kuszmierczyk	Strategy	sebastian.kuszmierczyk@elancoah.com

Grade McArdle	Manufacturing & Quality	GRACE.MCARDLE@elancoah.com

David Pugh	Finance	david.pugh@elancoah.com

Greg Slisz	Human Resources	GREGORY.SLISZ@elancoah.com

Marc Stoeber	Int’l Commercial	MARC.STOEBER@elancoah.com

Beatrice Vos	Legal	BEATRICE.VOS@elancoah.com

Tracey Ward	Research & Development	TRACEY.WARD@elancoah.com


Advanced Questions¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬:
¬
How do I calculate Elanco’s ECE? Where do I find the information to calculate ECE? Do our systems support ECE?
The calculation for Elanco’s ECE is laid out below. For more detail on this calculation, please refer to Elanco’s ECE handbook.

 

Much of the information to calculate ECE can be found in existing systems and/or published financials; however, it will likely take several years for the systems to fully support ECE.
What does a positive versus negative ECE mean? If ECE is negative do we necessarily shut down a project or sell a business?
ECE represents past performance; negative historical ECE simply means shareholder value was destroyed in the past so if we were making decisions over, we would likely make different choices. However, this does not really matter moving forward because what is most important is the change in ECE. The difference between the ECE of this year and last year represents the sum of all the positive and negative ECE decisions made during the year. A change from negative ECE to less-negative ECE is as important as a change from positive ECE to more-positive ECE of the same magnitude.

Is ECE just another measure that is going to be added to our existing KPIs? 
No - ECE will become the one metric to drive decision-making across the organization and link value creation with compensation. Companies with too many metrics get pulled in too many directions; attempting to optimize multiple metrics means they’re likely not optimizing any single metric. A core strength of ECE is its ability to help managers balance among traditional metrics such as revenue growth, margins, and capital productivity. ECE correlates more strongly with TSR than any traditional metric and works much better as a period measure, especially below the C-Suite and executive team levels.

Do our old metrics still matter when we switch to ECE?
Absolutely. Our previous metrics (revenue growth and EBITDA margin) are important drivers of ECE and as a result, they do remain important in an ECE framework. For example, revenue growth and EBITDA margin are drivers of Gross Cash Earnings (the profit metric component of ECE). 

How do we reconcile ECE with our external commitments to investors? 
Improvement in ECE is consistent with commitments we’ve made to the Street; in fact, EBITDA margin is one of the key drivers of ECE. An ECE framework will likely make it easier to achieve the 31% EBITDA margin by 2024 that we’ve committed to publicly. Eventually, with ECE as the common language we use throughout the company, including in compensation, it will be easier to manage externally. 

What will the ECE target be for the following year? How do I get paid a 1x bonus?
Effectively, last year’s ECE will be this year’s target. So if One Elanco generates the same ECE as last year, you will receive a 1x bonus. If One Elanco generates more than last year’s ECE, you will be paid more than 1x bonus. If One Elanco generates less than last year’s ECE, you will be paid less then 1x bonus. To generate last year’s ECE, One Elanco needs to generate a required return of 8.5% on the incremental investment made during the course of the year. Zero improvement simply means that Elanco generated exactly the amount of return that was required by investors for the additional investment made in the business. By focusing on improving from last year, there is no need to arbitrarily negotiate plans. Plans will be important for planning for “greatness” but will not be used to set your target bonus.
Will I have less control over my pay and/or less upside potential with ECE-based compensation?
The upside and downside risk will be exactly the same. Each dollar of ECE Improvement has the same value whether you achieve a bonus multiple higher than 1x or lower than 1x. The payout curve is a straight line.

When ECE is linked to compensation, everyone has the ability to control their pay by acting like an owner: 1) making operating decisions that drive more growth and EBITDA through integration and operating excellence; 2) investing in innovation and operating opportunities that will meaningfully beat the required return; and 3) harvesting all activities where value cannot be created and where the resources can do more good elsewhere.  

Will ECE discourage large investments that don’t immediately earn the cost of capital, but will create value in the long-term? What about investments driven by things like environmental or safety regulations?
No. When ECE is implemented properly, it encourages profitable long-term investments that create shareholder value. Further, the ECE way of the thinking requires managers to consider risks when evaluating environmental and safety-related investments. This is what we scientifically call a “no brainer.” If regulations are not met, then ECE will be much more negative when the regulators come knocking.

How do I manage to plan and ECE concurrently?
In an ECE framework, it is important for plans to be realistic but also challenging. ECE should remove gaming around plans, allowing for business units, teams, and employees to set stretch goals and continuously strive for improvement versus striving to simply set low expectations and beat plan.

Under an ECE framework, will scorecards and essential wins still be important?
Eventually, scorecards and essential wins will encompass ECE metrics so they will be in alignment; however, that will likely take some time to evolve. 

Is ECE the same as EVA? Why do we need ECE if we already use NPV?
No. While they are both economic profit measures, ECE addresses several deficiencies of EVA. First, EVA is substantially more complex than ECE and requires many more adjustments (often more than 150!). ECE’s few economic adjustments require inputs that can be drawn directly from Elanco’s income statement and balance sheet. Further, EVA can discourage growth investments by making new investments look prohibitively expensive while making older investments look comparatively “cheap” – causing businesses to sweat their prior investments. ECE has been specifically designed to address these EVA flaws in mind, so that it is much more practical to implement, tracks to TSR (Total Share Holder returns which is the price appreciation and dividends of a company) much better and is more effective as an annual performance metric. ECE is simple, provides a common language, and links value creation, behavior, and incentives. 

ECE and NPV are very consistent economically, with the main difference being that ECE works much better as an annual performance measure. Anyone familiar with the use of NPV will likely find it easy to adapt to the ECE framework. 

Can ECE be applied to our R&D portfolio?
Yes. ECE can be applied to evaluate decisions throughout the organization, including R&D investments. For example, ECE could be incorporated into a holistic resource allocation methodology for projects in the pipeline.

How does the ECE implementation fit in with all the other initiatives we have going on?
The ECE implementation complements Elanco’s other initiatives. Because ECE acts as a common language throughout the organization, it will make it easier to prioritize among the other initiatives, driving further change and growth within Elanco. The organizational change management effort in support of ECE recognizes and accounts for other initiatives. By building an ownership culture, the ECE implementation aims to create long-lasting cultural change at Elanco.


Manager Key Message Document

High-Level Explanation:
•	Elanco is moving away from its traditional performance measures of revenue, EBITDA, and Innovation and adopting a simpler way to measure value creation called Elanco Cash Earnings. 
•	Elanco Cash Earnings ties directly to long-term value creation and is focused on improvement, making what is good for the company and investors also good for employees and their families.

Why and how to use:
•	Elanco Cash Earnings or “ECE” is a simple and comprehensive measure that will provide better insights into where value is being created or destroyed as it “dollarizes” into one metric the trade-offs between growth, returns and cash flow. ECE tells you whether the value of your outputs exceed the value of your inputs and compares that value creation to what you could have generated had you invested in another alternative. 
•	The difference between the ECE of this year and last year represents the cumulative sum of all the positive and negative ECE decisions made during the year and ultimately, the change in ECE from one year to the next is what matters most!
•	Perhaps more important than the ECE measure itself is the One Elanco Ownership Culture that it is designed to nurture. Our dedication to driving One Elanco through an ownership culture starts with our commitment to our people and our vision of ‘food and companionship enriching life.’ 
•	Very broadly, an ownership culture is one in which every employee owns their decisions and the results and consequences of their actions. If you act as a One Elanco owner, ECE will be improved and value will be created, and if you purposefully increase ECE you will be acting like an owner. 
•	Some of the traits associated with an ownership culture are spending money like it’s your own, practicing extreme prioritization, embracing a willingness to fail, doing more and talking less, and balancing the long and short-term. Embracing an ownership culture through these traits requires substantial effort, but also yields substantial benefits. 
•	Every single Elanco employee can directly influence ECE by thinking like an owner in each decision they make in their day-to-day roles. My challenge to you is to brainstorm and share ECE-positive decisions we can make on our team!


Bonus message:
•	Elanco is moving from incentive compensation based on revenue, EBITDA, and Innovation to a plan based on improvement in ECE. 
•	Under this type of incentive structure, there is no target-setting – our goal is simple: to improve ECE.  
•	If we match last year’s ECE, we’ll receive a 1.0x bonus. If we improve on last year’s ECE, we’ve created value and we’ll receive greater than a 1.0x bonus.  If our ECE is lower than last year, we’ve destroyed value and will receive less than a 1.0x bonus.




1.	What are the benefits expected for Elanco & employees of this change (why is this a positive change?)
2.	Please confirm that 2022 payable corporate bonus would  have been “equivalent” in both systems? Impossible  to discuss with a WC without being transparent and enable them to express, why this is a positive change for the employees they support. Not sure this is possible given the Bayer acquisition
3.	With regards to question 5. I believe the question is more related to the  impact of the future acquisitions on the calculations (as it appears that the integration of Bayer does not  enable to give a sound comparison point… hence the concern for any future acquisitions… It is possible that a decision to make an acquisition could have a negative impact in year 1. This is part of the additional “ownership mentality” and stewardship over capital that the program promotes. This places a significant premium on forecast accuracy
4.	At least one employee in France (M&Q was reached out to for contribution on the ECE project. This raises 2 questions : are  things finalized? Is ECE global or local (ie. Global like corporate  bonus / or Affiliate bonus). Please confirm that we are still on a global level, as per corporate bonus. Yes, this program will still be on the global level, like the current corporate bonus



1.)	What and why are we doing this? This change is being made to create a simple, comprehensive bonus measure that promotes an improved ownership mentality. The new metric allows for improved collaboration (due to a single metric able to be used across departments), better longer-term thinking (all years are linked together), and improved stewardship behavior over Elanco’s balance sheet resources (rather than just being focused on the Income Statement, as our current bonus is) 
1.	What is the intention of this change, how does it fit into the overall Elanco comp philosophy? How is this change beneficial to employees? ECE maps directly to One Elanco’s ownership culture at all levels of the company by making what’s good for the company and shareholders also good for employees and their families. Importantly, we are moving away from a bonus payout based on performance against a negotiated plan, and moving to ECE, where you can be assured that if you make a decision to improve ECE, your bonus will go up. Traditionally our business plan, which represented a 1.0 ECB payout, always included subjective growth on Sales and EBITDA targets. With the ECE plan, employees achieve a 1.0 simply by attaining the same ECE as the prior year, making it likely to lead to higher payouts for employees.

I understand the cash flow analysis gives investors a better picture of the financial health of Elanco. The aim is to connect the bonus payment to the full picture of company performance/ financial health, which the ECE can provide (better than ECB).  
•	Is the focus here on the benefit of investors rather than employees? See above – the critical point of ECE is that both internal and shareholder interests are aligned – what drives sustainable success within the company is both good for employees internally and also shareholders externally.
•	Is this a cost cutting initiative?  No – see above note on the targets on ECE vs prior targets. In the new ECE method, achieving the same ECE as the prior year will achieve a 1.0 bonus payout, while improving ECE drives value creation and results in a payout greater than 1.0x. If ECE declines that means value is destroyed and will result in a bonus less that 1.0x.
•	Is this an initiative to change employees’ behavior to follow more of an ownership/ long term success orientation (Elanco comp philosophy)? Yes, that is correct.

2.)	What are the implications to employees, our process?  
•	Should we expect lower bonus payments with similar performance as in the past? Simulation would help here to understand the potential loss in different situations. Due to the separation from Lilly and Bayer acquisition, running a year-over-year simulation for Elanco is not feasible. Looping Fortuna in here as they may have additional simulations they’re able to share
•	Is anything else changing related to the bonus (targets or structure)? No, there is no other change to the administration, structure, or targets
•	What impact have possible future restructuring on ECE versus the current Multiplier calculation? This is still to-be-determined. As with the current bonus calculation (ie, there are currently opportunities for exceptions in the bonus calc), the Compensation Committee will likely have flexibility to adjust for anomalies or items that are outside of normal business performance or operations. That said, the general intent of ECE is that it is more inclusive of total company performance than a traditional measure, so there will likely be fewer exceptions or exclusions than the old plan. 


3.)	What are our competitors doing? Is this market practice/ trend? I believe our partners with Fortuna can provide some additional context here—both some of the case studies of companies who do use this, but also hypothetical bonus payouts of competitors if they had used this. The thought is that this will be a strategic advantage for Elanco, both tactically (as all business cases can be judged through the lens of ECE) but also in terms of employee motivation and retention, as an ownership mentality and focus on ECE leads to higher bonus payouts.

4.)	How and when will this change be implemented? Timeline? Is this global or any local country exceptions possible? This will be a global program. The first period of performance will have started on January 1, 2022, and run through December 31, 2022. 

5.)	How will this change impact employees leaving the company due to restructuring? There will be no change to the restructuring or other termination payout rules – these will all function the same as prior years.

6.)	What would happen if this change is not implemented? (Consequences for the organization of missing this opportunity) This change, conceptually, has already been approved by the Compensation Committee (as is the bonus plan each year).






My client already has plenty of metrics; why do they need another one?
Companies with too many metrics get pulled in too many directions; attempting to optimize multiple metrics means they’re likely not optimizing any single metric. We often find that each BU/function/geography unilaterally decides which metric(s) they’ll try to optimize. A core strength of RCE is its ability to help managers balance among traditional metrics such as revenue growth, margins, and capital productivity. RCE correlates more strongly with TSR than any traditional metric and works much better as a period measure, especially below the C-Suite and executive team levels.

If this is so great, why haven’t I heard of it before at my clients? 
Fortuna is a young boutique and has not focused on its growth ambitions – until recently. Because of the sensitive and strategic nature of executive measurement, most companies prefer to limit disclosure. Varian Medical Systems has publicly disclosed its adoption of our framework in SEC filings and articles, and we’ve provided details on their implementation in our case study.

How is this different than EVA, which some of my clients tried years ago, then abandoned?
Although EVA has advantages over other metrics, it has several deficiencies that RCE addresses as described earlier – particularly that it discourages long-term investments. Many early EVA implementations tended to be overly academic and complex, in most cases requiring more than 150 adjustments. RCE has been specifically designed with these EVA flaws in mind, so that it is much more practical to implement.

RCE sounds too complicated! How will non-finance/accounting people ever understand this?
We have extensive experience in successfully enabling non-financial people to understand how they can thrive with our methodology.  Our goal is to drive value creation, not to create academic research.

